Aerial Firefighting Use and Effectiveness (AFUE) Report
programs are prohibited from discriminating based on race, color, national origin, religion, sex, gender identity (including gender expression), sexual orientation, disability, age, marital status, family/parental status, income derived from a public assistance program, political beliefs, or reprisal or retaliation for prior civil rights activity, inany program or activity conducted or funded by USDA (not all bases apply toall programs). Remedies and complaint filing deadlines vary by program or incident. Persons with disabilities who require alternative means of communication for program information (e.g., Braille, large print, audiotape, American Sign Language, etc.) should contact the responsible Agency or USDA’s TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice and TTY) or contact USDA through the Federal Relay Service at (800) 877-8339. Additionally, program information maybe made available in languages other than English. To file a program discrimination complaint, complete the USDA Program Discrimination Complaint Form, AD- 3027, found online at https://www.ascr.usda.gov/filing-program-discrimination-complaint-usda-customer andat any USDA office or write a letter addressed to USDA and provide inthe letter allof the information requested inthe form. To request a copy ofthe complaint form, call (866) 632-9992. Submit your completed form or letter to USDA by: (1) mail: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Office ofthe Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, D.C. 20250-9410; (2) fax: (202) 690-7442; or (3) email: program.intake@usda.gov. USDA isan equal opportunity provider, employer, and lender. The Forest Service, an agency ofthe U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), has developed this information for the guidance ofits employees, its contractors, and its cooperating Federal and State agencies. The Forest Service assumes no responsibility for the interpretation oruse of this information by anyone except its own employees. The use of trade, firm, or corporation names isfor the information and convenience ofthe reader. Such use does not constitute an official endorsement or approval ofany product or service tothe exclusion of others that maybe suitable.
Contents Contents ........................................................................................................................................................ 3 Executive Summary ....................................................................................................................................... 5 Background ............................................................................................................................................... 5 Guiding Principles ...................................................................................................................................... 5 Significant Contributions & Key Findings .................................................................................................. 6 Introduction ................................................................................................................................................... 8 Methodology .................................................................................................................................................. 9 Data Collection Team ................................................................................................................................ 9 Study Design and Sampling Plan .............................................................................................................. 9 Field Data Collection ................................................................................................................................. 9 Data and Analysis Framework ................................................................................................................ 10 Recording Drop Objectives and Outcomes ............................................................................................. 12 Summarizing Aircraft Use and Effectiveness .......................................................................................... 14 Performance Measures ........................................................................................................................... 15 Limitations................................................................................................................................................ 15 Findings ....................................................................................................................................................... 17 Aircraft Use: Drop Summaries ................................................................................................................. 17 Aircraft Use: Drop Objectives .................................................................................................................. 17 Aircraft Use: Fire Types ........................................................................................................................... 18 Aircraft Use: Drop Objectives and Fire Types ......................................................................................... 19 Aircraft Use: Drop Objectives by Ground Engagement (Airtanker only) ................................................. 21 Aircraft Effectiveness: Drop Outcomes ................................................................................................... 22 Aircraft Effectiveness: Alignment of Objectives and Outcomes .............................................................. 22 Aircraft Effectiveness: Drop Interaction Percentages (IP) ....................................................................... 23 Aircraft Effectiveness: Drop Probabilities of Success (POS) .................................................................. 24 Aircraft Effectiveness: Drop POSby Drop Objectives ............................................................................. 25 Aircraft Effectiveness: Drop IPand POSby Fire Types .......................................................................... 28 Aircraft Effectiveness: Drop Outcomes by Ground Engagement (Airtanker only) .................................. 32 Conclusions & Next Steps ............................................................................................................................ 33 Appendix A- Aviation Asset Descriptions .................................................................................................... 34

Executive Summary Background In 2013, theU.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) reviewed Agency efforts to determine an adequate firefighting aircraft fleet and found there was insufficient information onthe performance and effectiveness of firefighting aircraft. In their report, GAO-13-684, they made three recommendations as follows: 1. Expand efforts to collect information on aircraft performance and effectiveness to include all types of firefighting aircraft inthe federal fleet. 2. Enhance collaboration between the agencies and with stakeholders inthe fire aviation community to help ensure that Agency efforts to identify the number and type of firefighting aircraft they need reflect the input ofall stakeholders inthe fire aviation community. 3. Subsequent tothe completion ofthe first two recommendations, update the agency’s strategy documents for providing a national firefighting aircraft fleet to include analysis based on information on aircraft performance and effectiveness andto reflect input from stakeholders throughout the fire aviation community. AFUE’s mission is: “To systematically document the operational utilization and tactical contribution of aerial firefighting resources that have the ability to deliver water and wildland fire chemicals in support of incident objectives.” This report describes project achievements, preliminary results, and opportunities for the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, its partners, and its cooperators to strategically improve aerial and overall firefighting with empirical information addressing the three GAO recommendations. This update will acquaint the reader with the study design, data collection, preliminary results, opportunities and next steps and highlights ofthe AFUE study. The goal isto develop and implement performance measures, support evidence-based resource deployment decisions, and inform strategies for future aviation budgeting and contracting. This effort will enable the Agency to monitor, learn, and adapt to changing conditions andto ensure financial viability while also maintaining a high degree of operational effectiveness. Guiding Principles • Performance and Effectiveness: Collection and analysis of data, along with definition of evaluation criteria, were anchored into the objective to quantitatively document aircraft performance and effectiveness per GAO recommendations. • Risk Management: AFUE supported best risk management practices, including generating best available information, supporting organizational learning, and summarizing performance ina dynamic and uncertain management context in terms of probability of success. • Transparency: AFUE reports clearly identified study strengths and limitations, including potential sources of error and bias.
Significant Contributions & Key Findings AFUE was conducted ata time of significant transition inthe aviation program. Ithas been less than 10 years since the Forest Service began transitioning away from Korean War-era airtankers. During this time, we have completed a full transformation ofour airtanker fleet and now exclusively operate next generation capable Airtankers. We have also modernized our helicopter fleet, resulting in generally better performance with more effective retardant and water delivery. Although not part ofthe AFUE study, we continue to modernize our aviation fleet by standing upthe unmanned aircraft system program which will further enhance our overall agency capabilities. The AFUE study provides a first-of-its-kind baseline information gathering and analysis effort regarding when and why aviation resources are utilized in responding to wildfires while evaluating mission completion performance. This information will be used to inform future analyses on operational use and fleet investment decisions. AFUE developed a novel performance measurement framework identifying a range of drop objectives and evaluated success with respect toa range of possible outcomes. The AFUE team capitalized on decades of firefighting experience and incorporated feedback from the interagency steering committee to build this expert-based, operationally relevant framework. AFUE showed that aviation resources are used fora wide spectrum of response operations throughout the different stages ofthe wildfire life cycle. The AFUE performance framework enabled scalable analysis of individual drops orthe ability to summarize results across multiple drops and sets of conditions by assigning a performance classification onthe basis of alignment between objectives and outcomes. AFUE developed two new performance metrics to summarize patterns of results: Interaction Percentage (IP) and Probability of Success (POS). • Interaction Percentage: Fora variety of reasons, not every drop interacts with a fire; AFUE only evaluated effectiveness for drops that did interact with fire. IP quantifies the proportion of drops that did interact with fire. Many drops provide utility and insurance by increasing line width orto anchor burnout operations, butdo not end up visibly interacting with the fire. IPis computed asthe number of drops with known outcomes that interacted with the main fire divided bythe total number of drops with known outcomes. • Probability of Success: POSis computed as number of effective drops divided bythe total number of drops with known and interacting outcomes. This measure canbe calculated for any setof conditions tosee how success likelihood can vary with factors such as drop objectives, aircraft type, and fire type. Using this framework asa guide for field data collection and analysis, AFUE identified patterns of aircraft use, performance and effectiveness that have not previously been documented. These quantifiable measures of objectives and outcomes – and how they vary across aircraft type – canbe used as essential pieces of information supporting efficient fleet use and design. Key findings include: • Common patterns in usage by fire type and drop objectives suggest the following grouping of aircraft: (1) helicopters and scoopers; (2) single engine airtankers (SEATs); and (3) large airtankers (LATs) and very large airtankers (VLATs). Given their ability to reload from water bodies, scoopers exhibit similar use characteristics to helicopters versus other airtankers. Although SEATs hada similar breakdown of drop objectives with LATs and VLATs, they were used more frequently for initial attack and entail widely different logistical considerations concerning response time, cruising speed, drop volume, etc.
• Across all drops from all aircraft, overall IPwas 89% and POS was0.82. • Most drops occurred in large fires rather than initial or extended attack dueto the duration, size, and values threatened during the lifecycle of those events, and the pattern was most pronounced for type 1 helicopters (74%), multiengine scoopers (74%), LATs (61%), and VLATs (65%). • Delaying fire spread wasa common objective for all aircraft, comprising 41% ofall drop objectives; itwas also a common outcome, comprising 36% ofall drop outcomes. • Reducing fire intensity wasa common drop objective for helicopters and scoopers (32% to48% of drops), and this tactic was largely effective atthe drop scale (POS = 0.81-0.96). • SEATs, LATs, and VLATs were rarely used to reduce fire intensity and instead used more for halting fire spread (41% to45% ofall drops); results indicate lower probabilities of success for these tactics (POS = 0.55to 0.67). • SEATs, LATs, and VLATs were used slightly more frequently than other aircraft to provide point protection of values (8% of drops). These drops had higher POS values compared to other airtanker drop objectives (POS = 0.78to 0.87). • SEATs, LATs, and VLATs had lower IPand POS values than helicopters and scoopers, related to their comparatively higher use for aerial line construction and halting fire spread. TheIP and effectiveness of drops from these aircraft were very similar across aircraft types. • Compared to helicopters, SEATs, LATs, VLATs, and scoopers had higher rates of unknown outcomes associated with no visual confirmation ofthe effect ofthe drop on achieving the objective.
Introduction In 2012, theU.S. Department of Agriculture Forest Service initiated a multi-year Aerial Firefighting Use and Effectiveness (AFUE) study. The study’s objective wasto “systematically document the operational utilization and tactical contribution of aerial firefighting resources that have the ability to deliver water and wildland fire chemicals in support of incident objectives.” An interagency steering committee provided guidance to develop and implement performance measures, support evidence-based resource deployment decisions, and inform strategies for future aviation budgeting and contracting. AFUE spent several years scoping, planning, and developing data collection methods. In 2014, the Forest Service, Fire and Aviation Management (FAM) program tasked the National Technology and Development Program (NTDP) to develop and apply performance metrics, technologies, and evaluation criteria that support effective strategic and tactical decisions. In 2015, the Fire Management Board signed a letter explaining the intent ofthe AFUE project and requested all incident commanders and duty officers grant AFUE access toall wildfire incidents nationwide for data collection. In that same year, under the NTDP organization, AFUE began field data collection with dedicated firefighters. AFUE wasa longitudinal study, and multiple years of data collection, quality assurance, and refinements support meaningful results. AFUE includes data from 2015-2018 at272 incidents in18 states spanning multiple jurisdictions and amounting to observations of18,929 helicopter drops, 3,303 scooper drops, and5,379 airtanker retardant drops. Each drop was analyzed onthe basis of objectives and outcomes, and results were summarized according to evaluation criteria to quantify performance and effectiveness. AFUE also collected data summarizing aircraft use according toa number of variables including fire type (initial attack, extended attack, or large fire support), fuel type, weather conditions, and drop characteristics (e.g., time ofday, aircraft speed), which will enable development of models to predict effectiveness and support decision making. The AFUE study directly comports with recommendations from theU.S. Government Accountability Office report GAO-13-684to collect information on aircraft performance and effectiveness, andto enhance collaboration between agencies and stakeholders inthe fire aviation community. The significant expansion ofthe knowledge base on aircraft performance and effectiveness from the AFUE study should facilitate timely and informed updates to agency’s’ aviation strategy documents. Further, the AFUE study is consistent with recommendations from past Quadrennial Fire Reviews to improve performance measurement and inform strategic dialogues about firefighting resources.
Methodology Data Collection Team The data collection team consisted of four crews, or modules, of three to four single resource qualified firefighters, each with roughly 10to 25 years of firefighting experience. Each module mapped aerial drop activity and recorded incident objectives, outcomes, and conditions for aerial suppression actions that supported tactical and strategic incident objectives. The module coordinator coordinated crew movements. Forest Service data collection teams also worked with aircraft vendors to ensure consistency in data collection methodologies. Additional details about the AFUE organizational chart, including roles for analysts, project and program leadership, and relationships toFAM canbe made available from AFUE personnel. Study Design and Sampling Plan AFUE wasa longitudinal study ofnon-random samples based onon-the-ground observations by AFUE personnel. AFUE sampled fires where firefighters used aircraft, particularly those where firefighters used airtankers. The target population was therefore aerial firefighting activity and not all wildland fires. Personnel needed tobe able to walk around, drive around, orfly over drops tomap and inspect them for drop pattern consistency, fuel type, and model, retardant shadowing, and other data. These factors ledto a purposive sampling design with an intent to track and sample from all aircraft activity each year. The design was implemented because a random experiment was not possible, sothe AFUE team selected fires for observation ina purposeful wayto capture a range of uses and conditions such that results are more likely tobe comprehensive and informative. AFUE surveyed targeted positions inthe Federal fire aviation community to validate terminology and evaluation methods. To increase the likelihood that sample observations would be representative ofthe target population, geographic variation was maximized by making observations inas many States, Geographic Area Coordination Centers (GACCs), and dispatch center areas as possible, paying close attention to areas that had less frequent active fire seasons. Further, AFUE personnel sampled from all fire management strategies, including full suppression, as well as confine and contain, andin rarer cases monitoring strategies. Every attempt was made tomap incidents and drops covering a wide range of topography, vegetation and fuels, weather conditions, and fire behavior ranging from smoldering (fire burning without flames) and creeping (fire burning with alow flame and spreading slowly) to flanking (when a fire is spreading roughly parallel tothe main direction of fire spread), running (fire spreading rapidly with a well- defined head), torching (burning ofthe foliage ofa single tree ora small group of trees, from the bottom up), and crown fire (fire that advances from topto topof trees or shrubs more or less independent ofa surface fire). Field Data Collection Data collection began byin-briefing incident commanders, followed by physical observations ofas much activity as possible. Data quality assurance and quality control wasan essential step, aswas communicating with fire managers during and after fires to complete and append records. GIS data was collected with mobile devices. Assessing effectiveness required comparison of outcomes tothe range of planned contributions. AFUE analysts classified outcomes into categories to generate performance
metrics that canbe broken down by many variables. Data dictionaries were developed to ensure standardized reporting of drop objectives and outcomes per these categories. AFUE personnel applied analysis protocols to data collection from 2015 to 2018, at incident locations throughout the USA in18 States and across all nine Forest Service regions. Incident commanders and duty officers generally granted AFUE access to wildfire incidents nationwide for data collection. Figure 1 shows where AFUE collected sample drops by lead response jurisdiction. Widespread access allowed AFUE to make observations ofall aircraft types and configurations for incidents that occurred in varying terrain, fuel, weather, and fire conditions. Figure 1—2015 to 2018 AFUE drop sample by lead response jurisdiction. Colors represent the number of observations by aircraft categories. Red represents fixed-wing retardant airtankers (all sizes). Gray represents fixed wing scoopers. Blue represents helicopters. Each fire season provides a different amount of sampling opportunity and intensity; this chart reflects the four-year composite. BIA—Bureau of Indian Affairs, BLM—Bureau of Land Management, DOD—Department of Defense, FWS—Fish Wildlife Service, NPS—National Park Service, USFS—U.S. Forest Service. Data and Analysis Framework The process of documenting use and recording objectives and outcomes was based on development ofnew terminology to classify and communicate aerial firefighting objectives and outcomes. Itwas also based on detailed observations across nested management scales (Figure 2). The most basic unit of analysis isa resource action, i.e., an individual drop from an aircraft. The next scale isa task, entailing oneor more related resource actions that focus efforts toward achieving common operational and tactical objectives ina common area, during one shift or operational cycle. The logic for the multiple scales presumes not all drops need tobe effective to reach desired incident outcomes. For the purposes of simplicity and clarity in this report, presentation of results is limited to drop objectives and outcomes.
Figure 2 – A sample map showing the features ofa fire and the scales for analyses. Yellow points and lines represent drops. Orange, dashed polygons delineate aerial tasks. Green lines and polygons delineate ground tasks. The blue-green polygon delineates the planning area. The red line delineates the final fire perimeter. Development of evaluation criteria for objectives and outcomes capitalized onthe AFUE team’s collective decades of firefighting experience and incorporated feedback from the interagency steering committee. After preliminary observations and fact-finding discussions, it became clear that firefighters used aircraft fora much broader range of objectives than building containment lines (which wasa common assumption in past studies). Based on observations and expert input, AFUE then defined a range of options for drop and task objectives (Table 1) and drop and task outcomes (Table 2). More detailed drop objective descriptions canbe made available by AFUE personnel; here, drop objectives are shown by their more general task work assignments. The general information and workflow for evaluating performance and effectiveness of aerial firefighting is shown in Figure 3. Cataloging observations provides a baseline understanding of patterns ofuse, and AFUE collected data ona range of additional attributes including geography, terrain, fuels, weather, drop characteristics, and ground resources, which further help contextualize findings. AFUE then recorded objectives and outcomes, and evaluated effectiveness based onthe degree of alignment between the objective and the outcome. Finally, AFUE developed two key performance measures that summarize effectiveness in terms ofhow often aircraft make drops that interact with the fire and the probability of success for those drops that do interact. Planning Area
Figure 1 — AFUE’s information and workflow for evaluating use, effectiveness, and performance measures. Recording Drop Objectives and Outcomes AFUE crews used air-to-ground channels and air-to-air radio frequencies to listen for drop requests and conversations among ground requestors, command and control, and dropping aircraft pilots. They occasionally gleaned information about air operations from incident management team planning meetings or operational briefings. Crews translated the local fire lingo (such as “check itup,” “hold iton that ridge,” “tryto save that barn”) and selected the best objective option from the list and description of drop objectives. Ifa drop occurred when crews were not able to listen, they later attempted to confer with individuals who made the request and guided the drop. Crews verified their selections with aerial command and control and/or ground fire personnel on scene when drops occurred and selected “unknown” when appropriate. Table 1 provides descriptions of drop objectives (grouped according to more general aerial task work assignments). USE Map where and when resource actions, tasks, planning areas and incidents occurred, fora sample of fires each fire season. OBJECTIVE Record the stated objective of each resource action, task and planning area. OUTCOME Record the outcome of each resource action, task and planning area. EFFECTIVENESS Analyze the degree of alignment between objectives and outcomes. PERFORMANCE METRICS Assess performance measures onthe basis of overall proportions of actions that interacted with fires and had effective outcomes.
Table 1 — Descriptions of task work assignments. More detailed drop objectives are available from AFUE. Drop objectives Description Reduce fire intensity/flame length The intent ofthe drop(s) isto cool an area of fire activity. This maybe needed so ground personnel can work closer tothe fire activity (e.g., begin or continue togo direct). Examples include knocking down crown fire, torching, and preventing spotting, etc. Delay fire spread/retard growth The intent ofthe drop(s) isto delay the fire’s rate of spread inthe same location (head, heel, specific flank, spot, etc.) ofthe fire. Examples include buying time for ground resources to construct line orfor evacuations. Support ignition operations The intent ofthe drop(s) isto support ignition operations. Examples include pretreating to reduce spotting potential, keeping fire in check to ensure implementation of preplanned ignition operation, or reducing growth potential inthe event of spots to prevent escape, etc. This isthe only work assignment that can include all drop-level objectives. Note this objective was used in 2015 and 2016. AFUE removed this objective asa domain option in 2017. AFUE recorded other objectives aircraft useto support ignition operation aerial tasks. Point protection The intent ofthe drop(s) isto protect a value(s) at risk (VAR). These drops should be within the immediate area ofthe VARor be executed primarily to reduce the probability of fire reaching the VAR orto reduce damage tothe VAR. Line fire/halt advance The intent ofthe drop(s) isto construct aerial line to halt fire spread. These drops are used to halt the spread ofa section ofthe fire’s edge before, during, or after ground engagement or without the aid of ground personnel. Extinguish fire/spot fire The intent ofthe drop(s) isto fully extinguish the entire portion ofthe fire or spot fires (generally a rare occasion, usually a small area, and likely a fine/flashy fuel). AFUE crews personally observed the fire’s interaction with the aerial drops and listened to radio traffic (including command, tactical channels, air-to-ground, and air-to-air victor radios) for information regarding how well drops achieved what they were intended todo (i.e., reduce fire intensity, delay fire spread, halt fire, protect points). Crews translated the local fire lingo (such as “it hung itup for long enough,” “it held,” “it skirted around those first three drops,” and “it spotted right over that first drop”) and selected the best option from the drop outcome domain list and data dictionary descriptions. When possible, crews verified their selections with ground fire personnel on scene when drops occurred or interacted with fire or with individuals who could observe drops from a distance. Table 10 provides descriptions of drop outcomes.
Table 2 — Descriptions of drop outcomes. More detailed outcomes are available from AFUE. Drop outcomes Description Unknown/no data The observer was unable tosee the drop(s) outcome fora reason related to safety, access, smoke, fire behavior, etc. and could not acquire this information from any other source. Or, the observer knows the drop(s) interacted with the fire but does not know the outcome. No fire interaction (NFI) The drop(s) did not interact with wildfire orthe drops were done to support ignition operations but did not interact with the main wildfire. Burned through, spotted over, outflanked, change in tactics/priorities, failed to contribute The drop(s) failed to contribute dueto fire advancing past the drop(s) by burning across (through) the resource actions, by means of firebrand ignition, by burning around (outflanking) the end ofthe resource action, orthe drops did not have a chance to contribute to broader task outcomes dueto a change in tactics/priority. Reduced fire intensity The drop(s) successfully reduced fire intensity inthe portion ofthe fire with which it interacted enough to contribute to successfully meeting planning area objectives without committing more resources. Protected point(s) successfully The drop(s) successfully prevented interaction or damage tothe object of point protection. Delayed fire spread Fire advanced past the drop(s), but the delay was enough to contribute tothe successfully meeting planning area objectives without committing more resources. Halted fire spread The drop(s) successfully stopped the portion ofthe fire it interacted with from advancing. Summarizing Aircraft Use and Effectiveness AFUE data collection allows for summarization of aircraft use according to many variables. Primary variables reported here include: • Aircraft type o Type 1, 2, and3 helicopters o Single-engine and multi-engine scoopers o Fixed wing airtankers: single engine airtankers (SEATs), large airtankers (LATs), and very large airtankers (VLATs) • Fire type, as recorded by AFUE observers and informed by common incident reporting requirements o Initial attack (IA): Aerial firefighters applied water, water enhancers, or long-term retardant with the initial responding resources only; and the fire was smaller than 100 acres in timber or300 acres in grass/shrub. o Extended attack (EA): Additional ground resources supported the initial response, and the fire was smaller than 100 acres in timber or300 acres in grass/shrub or when the fire duration exceeded 24 hours since engagement. o Large fire (LF): The fire was larger than 100 acres in timber or300 acres in grass/shrub. o Unknown: Attempts to determine the fire type failed. • Drop objective (see Table 1).
• Presence and engagement of ground resources (only for airtankers). The most basic analysis of drop effectiveness considers drop objectives, drop outcomes, and the alignment between them. Analysis of outcomes according tothe framework in Table 2 distills effectiveness into four categories: effective, ineffective, undetermined – no fire interaction, and undetermined – no visual confirmation. From this information, AFUE developed and implemented anew framework to assess the performance and effectiveness of aircraft inthe operational fire environment, which is described inthe next section. Drop outcomes and performance measures are summarized according tothe same setof variables used to summarize aircraft use. Performance Measures AFUE developed aset of effectiveness measures to evaluate the effectiveness of aerial firefighting actions informed by risk and financial management principles, specifically the need to think in terms of possibilities and probabilities recognizing the complex and uncertain operational fire environment. Assessing the frequencies with which management actions have opportunities to change outcomes and their corresponding probabilities of success are essential components of performance measurements, for example in assessing fuel treatment encounter rates or amount of built fire line that engaged with fire. An intent of this study wasto help build the evidence base around aircraft effectiveness to help fire managers monitor performance and assess probability of success. Itis important to note that performance evaluation presented here is agnostic asto why and how objectives were established, or what values were tobe protected, and only evaluates performance and effectiveness in terms of meeting drop-level objectives – a necessary prerequisite to begin to quantify return on investment. In light of this, AFUE created the following two performance measures: • Interaction Percentage (IP): IP quantifies the proportion of drops that did interact with fire. AFUE only evaluated effectiveness for drops that did interact with fire. IPis computed asthe number of drops with known outcomes that interacted with the main fire divided bythe total number of drops with known outcomes. • Probability of Success (POS): POSis computed as number of effective drops divided bythe total number of drops with known and interacting outcomes. This measure canbe calculated for any setof conditions tosee how success likelihood can vary with factors such as drop objectives, aircraft type, and fire type. Recognizing that itwas not always possible to observe outcomes, AFUE also developed a process to account for uncertainty in effectiveness and performance evaluation. Specifically, AFUE developed “uncertainty bands” that indicate the range between the worst and best cases possible. ForIP, uncertainty bands are quantified by assigning all unknown outcomes asno fire interaction (worst) or fire interaction (best). For POS, uncertainty bands are quantified by assigning all unknown – no visual confirmation outcomes as either ineffective (worst) or effective (best). ). In addition, low interaction percentages and probabilities of success are likely to occur in some cases as part of incident risk management and Interaction percentages and probabilities of success of100% are not feasible. Limitations A core element ofthe AFUE process is transparency, to clearly identify study limitations, including potential sources of error and bias. The study isnot exhaustive noris ita randomized experimental design, which limits inference; however, itis a first-of-its-kind observational study of aircraft useon wildfires which provides significant contributions tothe overall knowledge base. Sampling adequacy isa known constraint, requiring several active fire seasons of collecting field data to obtain sufficient data for national-level reporting.
Bias and error could come from several sources. First, the sample maybe biased towards incidents with substantial aircraft activity and especially those with any airtanker activity. Because AFUE was launched primarily to evaluate large and very large airtankers, choices were consistently made to observe fires with airtanker activity. Recognizing that many fires that receive any airtanker drops typically only receive afew drops, the sample could be underrepresenting fires with limited airtanker activity. Further, many aerial firefighting drops occur on remote fires that make direct observation challenging. Second, the amount of activity can quickly exceed the capabilities of field crews tomap and document everything, especially on larger fires. There are more unknowns for large fires than for small fires because itis much harder to comprehensively map activity over large areas. Third, many data records contain unknowns for some data fields, due primarily to safety reasons. Itwas especially difficult to observe drops interacting with fire while staying safely clear during high-intensity fire, which could lead to limited observations of drop effectiveness under extreme conditions. Fourth, time delays in arriving at drop locations to observe the fire interactions and confer with fire managers also introduced bias, especially for drops that were interior tothe perimeter and made prior to arrival on scene. Fifth, mapping tended tobe more complete during slower times ofthe year and with only four data collection modules itwas difficult to capture high activity across geographic regions. Lastly, subjective manager interpretations and field observer inferences dueto limited access or visibility issues also likely introduce bias and error.
Findings Aircraft Use: Drop Summaries Table 3 presents results ofa sample summary for27,611 drops that AFUE mapped across more than 270 incidents. Results are broken down according to aircraft category/type, including 18,929 drops from helicopters, 3,303 drops from scoopers, and5,379 drops from fixed wing airtankers. In general, helicopters were used more than other types of aircraft, and type 1 helicopters in particular were used most. Table 3 also summarizes sampling rate asa percentage ofthe estimated total number of drops to contextualize observation counts. Estimates for overall sampling rates were obtained by dividing the number of AFUE sample observations for each aircraft type by AFUE best estimates ofthe total target population each year (the federal estimate increased to reflect the estimated proportions of federal aircraft relative toall firefighting aircraft). Sampling rates vary across aircraft types, from alow of2% for type 3 helicopters toa high of13% for VLATs. Estimates for the single-engine scooper are considered a very rough estimate given access to only one year of Department ofthe Interior (DOI) records andno State records. Importantly, for the purposes of this report, characteristics were inferred from the sample toall Federal aircraft activity to describe broad trends and patterns ofuse and effectiveness. AFUE observation data was used to summarize use characteristics according toa number of additional variables, including liquids dispensed, fire type, incident complexity, fuel types, location on fire, split loads, tactics, drop plan, command and control presence, ground engagement and top requestors. In coming sections this report will present some of these results. Table 3 — Summary table of AFUE sample use results, by aircraft type, 2015 to 2018. Aircraft category/type Sampling Drops observed Estimated sampling rate (%) Helicopter— type 33,0282 Helicopter— type 25,7713 Helicopter— type 110,1305 Single-engine Scooper 1,6267 Multiengine Scooper 1,6777 Airtanker— SEAT 2,0767 Airtanker— LAT2,8129 Airtanker— VLAT 49113 Aircraft Use: Drop Objectives Figure 4 shows the mission profiles (distribution of drop objectives) for the various aircraft types. Notice the similarities between helicopter and scooper mission profiles and differences between helicopter/scooper and fixed wing airtanker mission profiles. Delaying fire spread wasa common objective for all aircraft, accounting for40% ofall drops. Otherwise, helicopters and scoopers were used more for reducing intensity (from 32% for type 1 helicopters to49% for type 3 helicopters), and airtankers were used more for halting fire spread (from 42% for SEATs to47% for VLATs). Extinguishing fire wasan uncommon objective, typically 3% of drops or less, with the exception of Type 3 helicopters (17%) and multiengine scoopers (9%).
Figure 4 — AFUE sample drop objective results by aircraft type, 2015 to 2018. Ignition support only includes drops labeled that wayin 2015 and 2016 but does not include drops done with variety of other drop objectives to support ignition operations in 2017 and 2018. Aircraft Use: Fire Types Figure 5 summarizes aircraft useby fire type (initial attack, extended attack, large fire, and unknown). In general, most sample drops occurred on large fires, which is largely consistent with earlier findings based on analysis of flight and fire records rather than drop observations. This is expected as large fires are longer in duration than short duration fires, allowing for more time available for drops to occur. Only one type of aircraft, the single-engine scooper, hada majority of drops for initial attack (51%). Conversely, five types of aircraft hada majority of drops for large fire: type 2 helicopter (57%), type 1 helicopter (74%), multiengine scooper (74%), LAT (61%), and VLAT (65%). Firefighters generally used smaller aircraft types within each category (type 3 helicopters, single-engine scoopers, and single-engine airtankers— SEATs) more in initial attack and used larger aircraft types within each category (type 1and 2 helicopters, multiengine scoopers, LATs and VLATs) more for large fire.
Figure 5 — Percentage of drops by aircraft category and type in each fire type as recorded by incident size atthe start of each planning area observation. Aircraft Use: Drop Objectives and Fire Types Figures 6-8 show the mission profile patterns ofthe different aircraft categories by fire type (see Figure 5), in effect further deconstructing the results from Figure 4and Figure 5. Some patterns in drop objectives across aircraft categories remain consistent, for instance the common objective of delaying fire spread, a heavier emphasis on reducing intensity for helicopters and scoopers, anda heavier emphasis on halting fire spread for airtankers. However, the relative proportions of these objectives differ across fire types. Notably, asthe fire type progresses from initial attack to large fire: (1) for helicopters and scoopers, the percentage of drops for reducing intensity generally decreases and the percentage of drops for delaying spread generally increases; (2) for airtankers, the percentage of drops for delaying spread generally decreases and the percentage of drops for halting fire spread generally increases; and (3) across all aircraft the percentage of drops for ignition support generally increases. Mission profiles across fire types were generally more stable across airtankers, and more variable across scoopers. Because mission profiles for extended attack were more variable andit was the least common fire type for all aircraft (Figure 5), presentation of results focuses primarily on comparing drop objectives for initial attack and large fire. Trends are apparent in mission profiles of aircraft types within categories by fire type. Firefighters used type 3 helicopters more for lining fire/halting advance and less for delaying fire/retarding spread inIA than in large fire. The mission profile of single-engine scoopers was like the mission profiles of helicopters inall fire types. The mission profile of multiengine scoopers was like the mission profiles of helicopters inIA but was more like the mission profile of airtankers inEA and somewhat like airtankers in large fire. The mission profile of multiengine scoopers was different than mission profiles ofall other aircraft inEA. SEAT, LAT, and VLAT mission profiles were very similar across fire types, with greater use for delaying spread inIA and greater use for lining fire/halting advance in large fire.
Figure 6 — Percentage of drops for different groups of drop objectives by aircraft category and type in initial attack -aerial firefighters applied water, water enhancers, or long-term retardant with the initial responding resources only; and the fire was smaller than 100 acres in timber or300 acres in grass/shrub. Figure 7 — Percentage of drops for different groups of drop objectives by aircraft category and type in extended attack—additional ground resources supported the initial response, and the fire was smaller than 100 acres in timber or300 acres in grass/shrub or when the fire duration exceeded 24 hours since engagement.
Figure 8 — Percentage of drops for different groups of drop objectives by aircraft category and type in large fire. Large fire (LF)—the fire was larger than 100 acres in timber or300 acres in grass/shrub. Aircraft Use: Drop Objectives by Ground Engagement (Airtanker only) Figure 9 shows mission profiles specifically for airtankers, broken down according tothe presence or some level of engagement by ground resources (crews, equipment, engines, or firefighters at large). Excluding drops with unknown drop objectives, 84% of observed airtanker drops were with ground engagement (“yes” bin), 11% without (“notat all-not mapped” bin), and5% where the presence or degree of engagement of ground resources was unknown (“unknown-not mapped” bin). Itis clear the mission profiles are different across these bins. For drops with ground engagement, the highest percentage of drops wasto delay fire/retard spread (47%), followed by halting fire advance (39%). In other circumstances, the predominant drop objective tends tobe halting fire advance (from 45% for “notat all” to78% for “unknown”). Point protection percentages were generally comparable for “yes” and “unknown” (7%), increasing to17% for “notat all.” Not surprisingly, ignition support (5%) was only an objective with ground engagement. Figure 9 — Percentage ofall airtanker retardant drops by drop objective with and without ground engagement. Ignition support includes drops labeled in 2015 and 2016 that way and which were done with variety of other drop objectives to support ignition operations in 2017 and 2018.
Aircraft Effectiveness: Drop Outcomes Figure 10 shows the range of drop outcomes for the various aircraft types. Patterns are generally consistent with distribution of drop objectives (Figure 4). Delayed fire spread wasa common outcome for all aircraft (from 26% for type 3 helicopters to51% for single-engine scoopers). A higher percentage of helicopter and scooper drops reduced fire intensity than airtanker drops (from 29% for type 1 helicopters to41% for type 2 helicopters), anda higher percentage of airtanker drops halted fire spread (from 16% for LATs to23% for SEATs). The percentages ofnot effective drops were generally highest for airtankers (14%-17%), with burned through line and outflanked line the most common failure mechanisms for airtanker drops (additional details on failure mechanisms canbe made available from AFUE personnel). Type 3 helicopters had the next highest percentage ofnot effective drops (12%), typically dueto fire spotting outside the line. Accounting for the higher number of drops and generally greater effectiveness associated with type 1and 2 helicopters, the overall percentage ofnot effective drops reduces to7%. A sizeable percentage (16%) ofall drops hadno fire interactions or unknown outcomes, which was most prominent for airtankers. Figure 10 — AFUE sample outcomes by aircraft type, 2015 to 2018. The shades of green represent positive contributions and red represents different reasons for failure (burned through the line, outflanked, spotted outside the line, failed to contribute-unknown reason, change in tactics/priority, jettison). Aircraft Effectiveness: Alignment of Objectives and Outcomes Figure shows the drop effectiveness of various aircraft types onthe basis of alignment of observed outcome with stated drop objective. The percentage ofno fire interactions and drops with unknown outcomes are shown as well. In general, helicopters and scoopers had higher percentages of effective drops (from 62% for multiengine scoopers to87% for single-engine scoopers) relative to airtankers (from 43% for LATs to54% for SEATs). Itis important to note also that airtankers had the greatest percentage of drops in “undetermined” categories, which affect effectiveness ratings. Inthe next sub-sections these numbers are analyzed in more detail describing the two key performance measures: interaction percentage and probability of success.
Figure 11 — AFUE sample effectiveness by aircraft, 2015 to 2018. Aircraft Effectiveness: Drop Interaction Percentages (IP) Figure 12 displays the drop interaction percentages (IPs) by aircraft type. Approximately 89% ofall drops interacted with a fire (right-most column), although this was variable across aircraft types. Type 3 helicopters and both types of scoopers had IPs of approximately 100%, reflecting primary use for direct tactics. IPs were slightly less for type 2 (93%) and type 1 (87%) helicopters, and even less for airtankers (80% for SEATs, 74% for LATs, and76% for VLATs), reflecting comparatively higher use for indirect tactics. Also shown in Figure 12are uncertainty bands that account for drops with undetermined outcomes. The upper bound assumes all undetermined drops interacted with the main wildfire, defined as drops made onthe interior tothe perimeter, point protection for example - (best case), and the lower bound assumes none ofthe undetermined drops interacted with the main wildfire (worst case). The bands are intended to convey the degree of uncertainty inthe data without relying onany statistical assumptions about the distributions ofthe data. The greater the difference between the upper bound and lower bound, the greater the uncertainty around the true IP. The uncertainty around IPis greatest for multiengine scoopers dueto that aircraft type having the greatest percentage of undetermined outcomes (Figure 11).
Figure 12 — AFUE sample interaction percentage (IP) results by aircraft, 2015 to 2018. TheIP for each aircraft isthe result of dividing the sample counts of interacting drops by total of interacting (effective plus ineffective) plus those with no fire interaction, in other words the proportion of drops interacting with the main fire toall drops with known outcomes. Bands indicate the range between the worst and best cases possible, assigning all unknown outcomes asno fire interaction or fire interaction. Aircraft Effectiveness: Drop Probabilities of Success (POS) Figure 13 shows the probability of success (POS) decimal values by aircraft type. POS values are only calculated for drops that had interactions with fires. Approximately 0.82of all interacting drops with known outcomes were deemed successful, although values were variable across aircraft types. POS values were generally higher for helicopters (0.74to 0.88) and scoopers (0.72to 0.90) than airtankers (0.67to 0.74). As with IP values, differences inPOS partially reflect differences in mission profiles and usage by fire type. Uncertainty bands indicate that the largest difference between best and worst case isfor airtankers; inthe best-case POS values are approximately 0.80and inthe worst case aslow as0.43.
Figure 13 — AFUE sample probability of success (POS) results by aircraft, 2015 to 2018. The POS for each aircraft isthe result of dividing the sample counts of effective drops bythe total of effective plus ineffective drops, in other words the proportion of effective toall interacting drops. Bands indicate the range between the worst and best cases possible, assigning all unknown outcomes as either ineffective or effective. Aircraft Effectiveness: Drop POSby Drop Objectives While the POS calculations for each aircraft type shown in Figure 13are informative, they donot account for the range of missions that aircraft perform. Figures 14-16 break down POSby aircraft type and specific drop objectives. First, Figure 14 addresses helicopter POSby drop objective; across all drop objectives and helicopter types the POS is0.85. Referring to Figure 4, helicopters are generally used most to reduce fire intensity and delay fire spread, and POS values for these drop objectives are generally between 0.80-0.90. The exception is type 3 helicopters with the objective of delaying fire spread, with aPOS of0.68. Type 3 helicopters had higher probabilities of success at reducing fire intensity/flame length and lining fire/halting advance (normally on small fires), but they were less effective at point protection. Type 2 helicopters were effective at reducing fire intensity/flame length, delaying fire/retarding spread, lining fire/halting advance, and extinguishing fire, but they were less effective at point protection. Type 1 helicopters were more effective than the other helicopter types at point protection and were effective at reducing fire intensity/flame length and delaying fire/retarding spread, but they were less effective at lining fire/halting advance (normally on large fires) or extinguishing fire. All helicopter types were effective at ignition support.
Figure 14 — AFUE sample probability of success (POS) results by helicopter type, 2015 to 2018. The POS for each aircraft isthe result of dividing the sample counts of effective drops bythe total of effective plus ineffective drops, in other words the proportion of effective toall interacting drops. Bands indicate the range between the worst and best cases possible, assigning all unknown outcomes as either ineffective or effective. Figure 15 addresses scooper POSby drop objective; across all drop objectives and scooper types the POS is0.81. Recall that mission profiles for scoopers are generally consistent with helicopters, and POS results here are qualitatively similar to those presented in Figure 14. Single-engine scoopers had higher POS values for reducing fire intensity/flame length (0.96), delaying fire/retarding spread (0.94), ignition support (1.00), and extinguishing all fire inthe area (1.00), but they were not very effective at point protection (0.42). Multiengine scoopers were effective at reducing fire intensity/flame length (0.89) and delaying fire/retarding spread (0.83), but they were not effective at point protection with anyof the15 drops observed. Neither ofthe scooper types were effective at lining fire/halting advance.
Figure 15 — AFUE sample probability of success (POS) results by scooper type, 2015 to 2018. The POS for each aircraft isthe result of dividing the sample counts of effective drops bythe total of effective plus ineffective drops, in other words the proportion of effective toall interacting drops. Bands indicate the range between the worst and best cases possible, assigning all unknown outcomes as either ineffective or effective. Figure 16 addresses airtanker POSby drop objective; across all drop objectives and airtanker types the POS is0.70. The patterns in Figure 16are discernibly different from those in Figures 14and 15. POS values or reducing fire spread are much lower, but these drop objectives comprise a very small proportion ofthe overall mission profile for airtankers (Figure 4). Instead, airtankers were generally more used for, and more successful at, delaying fire spread, halting fire spread, and point protection. SEATs had higher POS values for delaying fire/retarding spread (0.80), point protection (0.87), and lining fire/halting advance (0.67), but they were less effective at reducing fire intensity (0.43). LATs were effective at reducing fire intensity/flame length (0.69), delaying fire/retarding spread (0.75), and point protection (0.78) but they were less effective at lining fire/halting advance (0.55). VLATs were effective at delaying fire/retarding spread (0.80) and point protection (0.83) and were somewhat effective at lining fire/halting advance (0.62). There were not enough observations of VLAT use for reducing fire intensity/flame length or extinguishing all fire inthe area to identify any clear patterns of effectiveness. Airtanker assignments to extinguish active fire were rare, and the number of airtankers extinguishing fires, regardless of size, was too fewto identify any clear patterns. Large airtankers were not effective at ignition support, and there were no observations of SEATs or LATs supporting ignition operations.
Figure 16 — AFUE sample probability of success (POS) results by airtanker type, 2015 to 2018. The POS for each aircraft isthe result of dividing the sample counts of effective drops bythe total of effective plus ineffective drops, in other words the proportion of effective toall interacting drops. Bands indicate the range between the worst and best cases possible, assigning all unknown outcomes as either ineffective or effective. Aircraft Effectiveness: Drop IPand POSby Fire Types Figures 17-19 summarize IPand POS values for aircraft by fire types and can be referenced against Figures 6-8to see differences in mission profiles. Note the rightmost column inall three figures summarizes results across all drops, all aircraft types, and all fire types. First, Figure 17 summarizes these performance measures for initial attack. IPs were generally high inIA for all aircraft (79%-100%), but particularly high for helicopters and scoopers. A similar pattern emerged for POS, where values were higher for helicopters and scoopers (0.86to 0.98) and lower for airtankers (0.65to 0.81). Across all aircraft types, IP during IAwas 95%, and POS was0.90. Figure 18 summarizes IPand POS for extended attack; across all aircraft these values during EA were 96% and0.79, respectively. Performance for scoopers and airtankers appears generally poor during EA (IPas lowas 0.69for VLATs; POSas lowas 0.38for multiengine scoopers). However, EA comprises a small share ofthe overall workload of these aircraft (Figure 5) and the total number of drops from these aircraft is less than from helicopters (Table 3). Thus, overall performance inEA is generally high dueto the comparatively better performance of helicopters that comprise approximately 70% ofall observed EA drops. Figure 19 summarizes IPand POS for large fire; across all aircraft these values during large fire were 85% and0.79, respectively. POS for helicopters in large fire is generally lower than inIA orEA, most noticeably for type 3 helicopters (54%). One explanation is their small drop volume relative tothe extent of large fires. POS for scoopers in large fire (0.70to 0.84) is lower than forIA but higher than EA. POS for airtankers in large fire (0.70to 0.73) is higher than IA (except SEATs) and higher than EA. In general, IPs were lower for airtankers than other aircraft across all fire types. This wasin part because ofa higher percentage of indirect and contingency drops for airtanker operations compared to helicopter or scooper operations. IPs for SEATs and LATs were similar across fire types, and the highest IPfor
VLATs wasin IA. Type 2and type 1 helicopters had lower IPsin LF than in other fire types. These results are not surprising given that firefighters used helicopters more for ignition support (burnout or backfire) inLF than in other fire types. Perhaps the most interesting of these results isthe lower POS for most aircraft types inEA—the brief period between IAand LF—when firefighters used aircraft more for lining fire/halting advance (according to AFUE sample mission profiles). The higher degree of difficulty associated with lining fire/halting advance relative to other work assignments partially explains some ofthe differences inPOS, but other factors that correlate with different fire types are also likely contributors. For example, EA fires (by definition) have surpassed IA criteria and therefore often present more challenging fire behavior and suppression conditions. Figure 17 — AFUE sample interaction percentage (IP) and probability of success (POS) results by aircraft in initial attack, 2015 to 2018. TheIP for each aircraft isthe result of dividing the sample counts of interacting drops by total of interacting (effective plus ineffective) plus those with no fire interaction, in other words the proportion of drops interacting with the main fire toall drops with known outcomes. Bands indicate the range between the worst and best cases possible, assigning all unknown outcomes asno fire interacting or fire interaction. The POS for each aircraft isthe result of dividing the sample counts of effective drops bythe total of effective plus ineffective drops, in other words the proportion of effective toall interacting drops. Bands indicate the range between the worst and best cases possible, assigning all unknown outcomes as either ineffective or effective.
Figure 18 — AFUE sample interaction percentage (IP) and probability of success (POS) results by aircraft in extended attack, 2015 to 2018. TheIP for each aircraft isthe result of dividing the sample counts of interacting drops by total of interacting (effective plus ineffective) plus those with no fire interaction, in other words the proportion of drops interacting with the main fire toall drops with known outcomes. Bands indicate the range between the worst and best cases possible, assigning all unknown outcomes asno fire interacting or fire interaction. The POS for each aircraft isthe result of dividing the sample counts of effective drops bythe total of effective plus ineffective drops, in other words the proportion of effective toall interacting drops. Bands indicate the range between the worst and best cases possible, assigning all unknown outcomes as either ineffective or effective.
Figure 19 — AFUE sample interaction percentage (IP) and probability of success (POS) results by aircraft in large fire, 2015 to 2018. TheIP for each aircraft isthe result of dividing the sample counts of interacting drops by total of interacting (effective plus ineffective) plus those with no fire interaction, in other words the proportion of drops interacting with the main fire toall drops with known outcomes. Bands indicate the range between the worst and best cases possible, assigning all unknown outcomes asno fire interacting or fire interaction. The POS for each aircraft isthe result of dividing the sample counts of effective drops bythe total of effective plus ineffective drops, in other words the proportion of effective toall interacting drops. Bands indicate the range between the worst and best cases possible, assigning all unknown outcomes as either ineffective or effective.
Aircraft Effectiveness: Drop Outcomes by Ground Engagement (Airtanker only) Figure shows the percentages of airtanker drop outcomes with (“yes” bin), without (“notat all-not mapped” bin), and unknown (“unknown-not mapped” bin) ground engagement. Relative to Figure 9, the number of drops is slightly higher dueto drops with observed outcomes butno recorded drop objectives. The most common outcome for drops with ground engagement was delayed fire spread (31%) followed byno fire interaction (22%), halted fire spread (20%), and unknown (9%). The most common outcome for drops without ground engagement was not effective (26%) followed by delayed fire spread (22%), no fire interaction (15%), and unknown (15%). For the remaining 281 drops where itis unknown whether ground resources were present, the dominant outcome was unknown (48%) simply confirming the limited information available from this small subset of observations. The estimated drop POS was 0.72 with ground engagement, 0.56 without ground engagement, and0.64for unknown – not mapped. Delayed fire spread was the most common outcome for drops with and without ground engagement. There wasa slightly higher percentage ofno fire interaction for drops with ground engagement. Drops halted fire spread about twice the percentage with ground engagement compared to without ground engagement, anda higher percentage of drops protected points successfully without ground engagement compared to with ground engagement (because itwas attempted a higher percent ofthe time without ground engagement). The percentages of drops that burned through the line were similar with and without ground engagement, but the percentage of drops that outflanked and spotted over the line were higher without ground engagement. Figure 20 — Percentage of airtanker retardant drops by drop outcome with and without ground engagement. The shades of green represent positive contributions and red represents different reasons for failure (burned through the line, outflanked, spotted outside the line, failed to contribute unknown reason, change in tactics/priority, jettison).
Conclusions & Next Steps The goal isto develop and implement performance measures, support evidence-based resource deployment decisions, and inform strategies for future aviation budgeting and contracting. To accomplish that, the AFUE study summarized the range of aircraft, fire environments, and objectives associated with aerially delivered water and retardant missions. Through this effort the relative distribution of objectives across multiple aircraft and delivery platforms and the probability of meeting site specific drop objectives was determined inthe field. Direct field observation has allowed a richer understanding of mission objectives, interaction percentages, and probabilities of success for the range of platforms and conditions under which aircraft operate. These data provide a critical framework for future work to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of aviation in supporting wildfire incident objectives. The AFUE study made a number of important contributions tothe current knowledge base on aerial firefighting, as well as several important methodological contributions in terms of developing common terminology, definitions, and performance measures. Results will be shared with the fire community to inform training and development of actionable guidance for firefighters and aviation fleet managers based on empirically sound data and methods. AFUE findings could also befed into processes of planning, assessment, monitoring, and feedback for fire managers who establish operational plans, request aircraft, and order drops to achieve tactical missions. Future AFUE work may proceed along a number of lines, including developing additional performance metrics and exploring options to provide incident managers with dashboards and maps that show drop activity on their incidents. A particularly promising avenue is expanded collection and analysis of Additional Telemetry Unit (ATU) data, which provide a mechanism for gathering basic aviation use information and allows managers to perform real-time oversight to ensure ongoing use aligns with strategic objectives and Agency goals. Further, building a comprehensive archived ATU data repository could improve national scale accountability by providing opportunities for post-incident analysis and learning of fleet workload and usage patterns. By investing in additional aerial data capture and analysis, the Agency could then capitalize on advances inbig data analytics. For example, analysts could use machine learning algorithms to facilitate the process of designing new performance metrics through advanced statistical analysis of factors such as fuels, topography, multispectral imagery, and next-generation fire danger indices. Predictive models could also be built to help managers evaluate probability of success and determine efficient aviation strategies, and these analytics could be embedded into existing operational decision support systems. Moving forward, there are also opportunities to embed AFUE findings and principles into broader ongoing efforts. This includes comprehensive analysis of suppression effectiveness as required bythe Fiscal Year 2018 Omnibus Bill, development of next-generation decision support and resource tracking required bythe “John D. Dingell, Jr. Conservation, Management, and Recreation Act,” Public LawNo. 116-9, anda range of situational awareness and decision support products developed through the Risk Management Assistance program. Such efforts would enable stronger integration of firefighter tactics, with improved geospatial data on actions such as line construction, burnout operations, and point protection activities. Enhancing interoperability of information systems with interagency partners would further complement efforts to paint a more comprehensive picture of aerial firefighting use and effectiveness. Insum, the AFUE study has effectively and comprehensively responded to recommendations from GAO- 13-684 and has opened the door for additional learning and system improvement. Results will help the Agency implement performance measures, support evidence-based resource deployment decisions, and inform strategies for future aviation budgeting and contracting.
Appendix A- Aviation Asset Descriptions LARGE AIRTANKERS Aircraft Make/ Model BAe- 146-200 Operator Neptune IAB Approved Tank Full approval. Meets all coverage levels. Retardant Gallons/ Wt. 3000/ 27,000 pounds Speed (mph) 350 Aircraft Make/ Model RJ-85 Operator Aero Flite IAB Approved Tank Full Approval. Meets all coverage levels Retardant Gallons/ Wt. 3000/ 27,000 pounds Speed (mph) 350 Aircraft Make/ Model Lockheed EC-130Q Operator Coulson IAB Approved Tank Full Approval. Meets all coverage levels Retardant Gallons/ Wt. 4000/ 36,000 pounds Speed (mph) 350 Aircraft Make/ Model Boeing MD-87 Operator Aero Air LLC (Erickson) IAB Approved Tank Full Approval. Meets all coverage levels Retardant Gallons/ Wt. 3000/ 27,000 pounds Speed (mph) 350
Aircraft Make/ Model Lockheed C-HC-130H/J Operator MAFFS - USAir Force, Air National Guard IAB Approved Tank Full Approval. Meets all coverage levels Retardant Gallons/ Wt. 3000 (MAFFS II), 27,000 pounds Speed (mph) 230 Aircraft Make/ Model Boeing 737-300 Operator Coulson IAB Approved Tank Interim during field evaluation Retardant Gallons/ Wt. 4000/ 36,000 pounds Speed (mph) 350 Aircraft Make/ Model Viking Q-400 Operator Aero Flite and France IAB Approved Tank Interim approval through 2020 Retardant Gallons/ Wt. 2600/ 23,400 pounds Speed (mph) 375 VERY LARGE AIRTANKERS Aircraft Make/ Model DC-10 Operator 10 Tanker IAB Approved Tank Full approval. Meets all coverage levels. Retardant Gallons/ Wt. 9,400/ 84,600 pounds Speed (mph) 350
Aircraft Make/ Model Boeing 747-400 Operator Global Supertanker IAB Approved Tank Interim through 2020. Retardant Gallons/ Wt. 18,000/ 162,000 pounds Speed (mph) 450 SINGLE ENGINE AIRTANKER Aircraft Make/ Model Air Tractor 802 Operator Various IAB Approved Tank NA Retardant Gallons/ Wt. 800/ 7200 pounds Speed (mph) 200 WATER SCOOPERS Aircraft Make/ Model Viking CL-415 Operator Aero Flite and several Canadian Provinces IAB Approved Tank Yes Water Gallons/ Wt. 1620/ 12,960 pounds Speed (mph) 200 Aircraft Make/ Model Air Tractor Fire Boss Operator Various IAB Approved Tank NA Water Gallons/ Wt. 700/5600 pounds Speed (mph) 170
HEAVY – TYPE 1 HELICOPTERS Helicopter Make/ Model Sikorsky/ Erickson S-64E/F Operator Erickson, Heli Transport Svcs. & Siller Bucket/ Tank Gallons ~2500 Speed (mph) 132 Helicopter Make/ Model Sikorsky CH-54A/B Operator Helicopter Transport Svcs. & Siller Bucket/ Tank Gallons ~2500 Speed (mph) 132 Helicopter Make/ Model Boeing BV-234 Operator Columbia Bucket/ Tank Gallons ~3000 Speed (mph) 175 Helicopter Make/ Model Boeing CH-47 “Chinook” Operator Billings Flying Svc., Columbia, Helimax Bucket/ Tank Gallons ~3000 Speed (mph) 175
Helicopter Make/ Model Boeing BV-107-II Operator Columbia Bucket/ Tank Gallons ~1100 Speed (mph) 138 Helicopter Make/ Model Boeing CH-46E “Sea Knight” Operator Sky Aviation Bucket/ Tank Gallons ~1100 Speed (mph) 138 Helicopter Make/ Model Sikorsky S-61A/N/ SH-3H Operator Coulson, Croman, HTS and Siller Bucket/Tank Gallons ~500 Speed (mph) 138 Helicopter Make/ Model Sikorsky S-70/ UH-60NG Operator Firehawk Helicopters, PJ Helicopters, LA County & BLM Bucket/ Tank Gallons ~900 Speed (mph) 180 Helicopter Make/ Model Kaman K-1200 Operator Various Bucket ~680 Speed (mph) 90
Helicopter Make/ Model Airbus H215/225NG Operator Various Bucket ~1000 Speed (mph) 160 MEDIUM – TYPE 2 Helicopter Make/ Model Bell 205 / 210 and UH-1 Operator Various Bucket/Tank ~500 Speed (mph) 121 Helicopter Make/ Model Bell 212HP Operator Various Bucket/Tank ~350 Speed (mph) 132 Helicopter Make/ Model Bell AH-1 Operator USFS Bucket/Tank None. Speed (mph) 219
Helicopter Make/ Model Bell 412 Operator City and County Fire Departments. Commercial operators Bucket/Tank ~360 Speed (mph) 140 LIGHT – TYPE 3 HELICOPTERS Helicopter Make/ Model Airbus H125 NG Operator Various Cruise Speed kts/mph 157 Passengers/ Gallons 5/ ~ 260 Helicopter Make/ Model Bell 407NG Operator Various Cruise Speed kts/mph 136/152 Passengers/ Gallons 6/ ~ 270 Helicopter Make/ Model Bell 206L3/4 Cruise Speed kts/mph 110/127 Passengers/ Gallons 6/ ~ 225
Helicopter Make/ Model Bell 206B3 Operator Various Cruise Speed kts/mph 110/127 Passengers/ Gallons 4/ ~ 160 Helicopter Make/ Model MD- 500C/D/Eand 530F Operator Various Cruise Speed kts/mph 135/155 Passengers/ Gallons 5/ ~ 160 Helicopter Make/ Model MD- 520N/ 600N Operator Various Cruise Speed kts/mph 134/154 (Explorer) Passengers/ Gallons 6/ ~ 300 (Explorer) Helicopter Make/ Model Sikorsky S-76++/ D Operator Coulson Cruise Speed kts/mph 155/178 Passengers/ Gallons 12/ ~ 300
NOT TYPED HELICOPTER Helicopter Make/ Model Agusta-Westland AW-119NG Operator Various Cruise Speed kts/mph 140/150 Passengers/ Gallons 8/ ~ 315 Helicopter Make/ Model Agusta-Westland AW-109NG Operator Various Cruise Speed kts/mph 154/177 Passengers/ Gallons 7/ ~ 200 Helicopter Make/ Model Agusta-Westland AW-139NG Operator Various Passengers/ Gallons 12/ ~ 420 Helicopter Make/ Model Bell 429NG Operator Various Cruise Speed kts/mph 154/177 Passengers/ Gallons 7/ ~250 Helicopter Make/ Model Airbus H130 NG Operator Various Cruise Speed kts/mph 123/141 (120) Passengers/ Gallons 4/ ~ 180 (120)
Helicopter Make/ Model Airbus H135/ 145NG Operator Various Cruise Speed kts/mph 123/141 (145) Passengers/ Gallons 4/ ~ 180 (145) LARGE AIRCRAFT Aircraft Make/ Model Boeing 737-500 Operator Sierra Pacific Mission(s) Passenger Transport Passengers/ Speed (mph) 101/ 480 Aircraft Make/ Model Short Bros. SD3-60 Sherpa Operator USFS Mission(s) Smokejumper, Cargo and Passenger Transport Passengers/ Speed (mph) 10 Smokejumpers, <15 passengers/ 240 Aircraft Make/ Model CASA 212 Operator Bighorn Airways Mission(s) Smokejumpers and para-cargo Passengers/ Speed (mph) 8 smokejumpers/180 Aircraft Make/ Model Dornier 228 Operator Bighorn Airways Mission(s) Smokejumpers and para-cargo Passengers/ Speed (mph) 8 smokejumpers/ 215
Aircraft Make/ Model Viking DHC-8 Operator Bighorn Airways Mission(s) Smokejumpers and para-cargo Passengers/ Speed (mph) 10 smokejumpers/ 310 LIGHT AIRCRAFT Aircraft Make/ Model Viking DHC-6 Twin Otter Operator USFS and Leading Edge Missions(s) Smokejumper, para-cargo and passenger Passengers/ Speed (mph) 8 smokejumpers / 190 Aircraft Make/ Model Cessna Citation II550 Operator USFS Mission Fire mapping, Infrared and passenger transport Passengers/ Speed (mph) 8/ 450 Aircraft Make/ Model Beech King Air 200/250 Operator USFS and various Mission Fire mapping, Infrared, air attack and diverse missions Passengers/ Speed (mph) 7/ 300 Aircraft Make/ Model DeHavilland DHC-2 Beaver Operator USFS Mission Water dropping and diverse missions Passengers/ Speed (mph) 6/ 140
Aircraft Make/ Model Cessna 206 Station Air Operator USFS and various Mission Recon, air attack and diverse missions Passengers/ Speed (mph) 5/160 Aircraft Make/ Model Quest Kodiak 100 Operator USFS and USFW Mission Recon, air attack and diverse missions Passengers/ Speed (mph) 9/200 Aircraft Make/ Model Aero Commander 500 Operator Various Mission Air attack, fire mapping, Infrared and diverse missions Passengers/ Speed (mph) 4/ 200 Aircraft Make/ Model Piper Baron P-58 Operator Various Mission Air attack Passengers/ Speed (mph) 5/ 200 Aircraft Make/ Model Twin Commander 680/690 Operator Various Mission Air attack Passengers/ Speed (mph) 7/ 320
Aircraft Make/ Model Cessna 182 Operator Various Mission(s) Diverse missions including recon, backcountry and resource management Passengers/ Speed (mph) 3/167 Aircraft Make/ Model Beech King Air90 GT Operator Tenax and various Mission Aerial Supervision/Leadplane, air attack and diverse missions Passengers/ Speed (mph) 5/260 Aircraft Make/ Model Beech King Air 200GT Operator Tenax Mission Aerial Supervision/Leadplane, air attack and diverse missions Passengers/ Speed (mph) 7/ 330
