State School and Technical Facility for Fire and Disaster Protection Large forest fires inthe state of Brandenburg Report onthe 2022 wildfire season
Notice For the sake of readability, we sometimes refer to individuals or groups of individuals in this report inone form or another, whereby this always refers to both female, diverse and male persons.
Forest fire near Treuenbrietzen OT Frohnsdorf 3.5.2. Tactical fire 3.4. 631 836 47 List of abbreviations 3.5. 3.2.1. Endurance capabilities ofthe disaster relief units 3.2.2. Inter-municipal TLF trains (TLF- Sofort) Forest fire near Lieberose OT Butzen 3.1. 3.5.3. Development of tactical standards of action 3.5.4. Participation of specialized non-profit organizations 3.5.5. Training opportunities for staff work and operational section commands 3.5.6. Useof digital radio 3.5.7. Participation in European knowledge transfer 3343 2.2. 49 Special forest fire events in 2022 1838 303.5.1. Development of necessary training products (context: vegetation fires) 41 Airborne support 3.3.1. Airborne reconnaissance 3.3.2. Request procedures for airborne operations 3.3.3. Determination of drop zones 3.3.4. Involvement of service providers 346 2.5. 3539 Capability organization/management Forest fire near Bad Liebenwerda and Mühlberg/Elbe 3. 3.4.1. Early involvement of KMBD technical advice 3.4.2. Data exchange of suspected explosive ordnance sites 3.4.3. Efficient, safe tactics/special technology 2.1. 3243 3748 Introduction 143.3. 2941 Conclusions and optimization potential 45 Central State Procurement and Technology 3.6.1. Personal Protective Equipment 3.6.2. Central State Procurement 3.6.3. Involvement of Agricultural Enterprises 2.4. 3523 393.2. Forest fire near Neuseddin/Beelitz 42 Explosive ordnance (suspected) 2. 3236 471. 103.2.3. Development of capability modules for fire protection units Forest fire near Falkenberg/Elster 28 Training/Tactics 3444 3.6. 2.3. Command organization/management 3.1.1. Situation analysis, information deficits, and shift handovers 3.1.2. KKM liaison personnel (on-call system) 2138 TABLE OF CONTENTS
Conclusion Operational preparation 3.7.1. Alarm and deployment order/force-resource approach 3.7.2. Analysis of vegetation fires and weather data 3.7.3. Specialized vegetation firefighting units 5556 Cross-border cooperation 503.8. 5751 Preventive forest fire protection 513.8.1. Fire load management 3.8.2. Room planning 3.9. 5253 3.9.1 Deployment of advance teams 544. 3.7. 55
Defense ofAK V IRLS KatSV Authorized digital radio authority ofthe state of Brandenburg professional fire brigade LMBV CBRN German Lifesaving Society Regulatory Ordinance for the Prevention of Dangers Caused by Explosive Ordnance (Explosive Ordnance Ordinance for the State of Brandenburg) AGBF HVL Brandenburg State Fire Brigade Association CHAPTER PROFIT KMBD Chemical, biological, radioactive, nuclear Frankfurt (Oder) Lawon Fire Protection, Assistance, and Disaster Control ofthe State of Brandenburg (Brandenburg Fire and Disaster Control Act - BbgBKG) Crisis Management Coordination Center ofthe State Government Committee for Fire Services, Civil Protection and Civil DMO Command vehicle HuPF IMK State School and Technical Facility for Fire and Disaster Protection ofthe State of Brandenburg Working Group Vof the IMK Integrated regional control center LFVeV BSE Direct Mode Operation Manufacturing and testing description for universal firefighter protective clothing Dahme-Spreewald district ASBB EUMOH Barnim district Fire protection unit Havelland district European Union Coordination group ofthe state government's disaster control staff Working group ofthe heads ofthe professional fire brigades in Brandenburg FROM LSTE Oder-Spree district GTLF IuK BbgBKG Standing Conference of Interior Ministers and Senators ofthe States LDS BMI German Institute for Standardization EE Large tank fire engine Brandenburg State Forestry Authority AKV KampfmV KGS Federal motorway Federal Ministry ofthe Interior, Building and Home Affairs THE Elbe-Elster district Ordinance onthe Units and Facilities of Disaster Protection (Disaster Protection Ordinance - KatSV) AFKzV DGUV Lusatian and Central German Mining and Management Company BARIN FF/O German statutory accident insurance Information and communication LFBBF Explosive Ordnance Disposal Service ofthe State of Brandenburg DLRG eV Euronorm List of abbreviations
MOL Märkisch-Oderland district WaldBrSchVO MV Ordinance onthe prevention and control of forest fires (Forest Fire Protection Ordinance - WaldBrSchVO) ofthe state of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania Ministry of Finance ofthe State of Brandenburg Potsdam-Mittelmark district PM ZDPol Ministry ofthe Interior and Local Government ofthe State of Brandenburg SPN Spree-Neisse district MdF State of Brandenburg TF Teltow-Fläming district WHAT MoFüst TEL Tank fire engine Forest Actof the State of Brandenburg OHV Oberhavel district Central Police Service ofthe State of Brandenburg Personal protective equipment Modular deployment unit PSA LWaldG Ministry of Rural Development, Environment and Agriculture ofthe TEL Technical Operations Management WITH Mobile command support staffs THW Federal Agency for Technical Relief MLUL
The crown spacing exceeds one crown width. pre-clinical emergency medicine Human Science Characteristic Curricula Severe damage caused by pests, hail, storms, etc. The crowns touch the tips ofthe branches. Wood that has been felled andis available for further useas a result of storm damage, drought, pest infestation, etc. Fleetmapping Windward light existing tree population Tax cracks Crown closure degree The crown spacing corresponds toone crown width. Areas of converging air near the ground. The winds that occur here always flow from the area of higher air pressure tothe area of lower pressure. Anthropologie Final degree crowded closed loose calamity Emergency medical services, medical assistance for emergency patients outside a hospital The crowns interlock deeply. Calamity logging Curricula The crown spacing is smaller than one crown width. Stock umbrella Technical summary of several voice subscribers or call groups windward side spacious Convergence line Loading rack/Loading rucksack Stock density glossary
Counting the forest 3Wildland-Urban-Interface 2Open land areas are areas that are not built upor dominated by trees, thus all biotope types that are not 1Vegetation fires asa generic term for all types of fires on vegetation areas 4Risk = probability of occurrence x extent of damage winds, on vegetation areas. This circumstance was further aggravated by insignificant increases inthe proportion of calamity wood onthe forest areas (winter storms in 2022, drought stress, insect infestation). In addition toa large number of moderate forest fires that were brought under control within a short period of time bythe local fire departments, afew forest fires developed extreme fire behavior dueto unfavorable conditions. In some cases, several hundred hectares of forest were destroyed within afew hours dueto very high propagation and spreading speeds. During the high, Phases of fire intensity that are difficult to control also lead to direct (danger of fire spreading) or indirect (dueto smoke) threats to residential areas, resulting in evacuation orders for residents. The energy release phenomena of these few, extreme forest fire events indicate a future trend and were previously unknown tothe majority of emergency responders in this form. The population living inthe vicinity ofthe forest fires had understandable concerns for their safety and property. are suspected of containing explosive ordnance. Inthe event ofa fire, this complicates ground-based firefighting inthe affected areas and, in individual cases, requires aerial firefighting support from the Federal Police or Bundeswehr. Given climate change and the prevailing conditions inthe country that favor forest fires (pine density, site conditions, munitions contamination), the risk of forest fires is increasing and must be reduced. Preventive forest fire protection measures primarily target forest restructuring, limit conditions that favor fire outbreaks, and create improved conditions for successful forest firefighting. While inthe past decade, citizens and emergency services have regularly been aware of smaller forest fires with moderate destructive potential, this perception has changed significantly since 2018. The year 2022 in particular has shown all stakeholders the fire risk that can arise from persistent high pressure, combined with a lack of precipitation, prolonged sunshine intensity and strong With low water retention capacity and the dominant tree species pine (Pinus sylvestris), itis oneof the areas most prone to forest fires in Germany. An additional special feature ofthe state of Brandenburg is that ofa total of approximately 1 million hectares of forest area, about 292,000 hectares Forest and vegetation fires are not unknown tothe population, emergency services, and specialists inthe state of Brandenburg. With its large forest area, the prevailing subcontinental climate, and the light sandy soils, the state of Brandenburg isone ofthe most vulnerable regions in Germany. Furthermore, in addition to pure forest fire events, fires1 on agricultural land, wasteland, and other open land2 must also be included inthe scope of this report. In particular, the existing interconnection between settlements and contiguous vegetation areas3 can result ina greater risk impact4 in wildfires. The resulting dangers and damage must be prevented. 1. Introduction
(cid:127) the discussion results ofthe advanced training seminar for district fire chiefs and managers ofthe professional fire brigades from 24to 25 November 2022 (cid:127) Findings ofthe interdepartmental forest fire working group inthe MIK with the participation of district fire chiefs and interest groups (LFVBB eV, AGBF BB) (cid:127) The statistical surveys ofthe Brandenburg State Forestry Authority Potential for optimization and further development is identified. In addition to sustainable preventive threat mitigation measures, the focus is also on further improving defensive structures. The basis for this report is: (cid:127) the presentations and discussion points ofthe evaluation event onthe forest fire events in 2022 ofthe LSTE on27 October 2022 in Lübbenau/Spreewald (cid:127) the information and documents available to Department 34 (MIK) and the LSTE orat least to reduce itby using the knowledge gained this season toThe emergency services performed intensive and excellent work over several weeks/months.
Figure 2: Numerical and percentage breakdown of forest fire reports/ burned areas, depending onthe WGS (Source: LFB, 2022) Figure 1: Graphic representation of fire alarms and areas, WGSt dependent (Source: LFB, 2022) 86 1012 04 2 5Excluding the federal state, there were a total of507 forest fires on 1410.90 hectares. 1,645,9823,371.068,97310,94n% Level 0,12 Area 0,421,66In% 75,76n 22,041 23 45 Number of fires Area of fires 2239 138 193 115 Legend/Value table 2022 4,347,6927,2238,0722,68 Total fires: 5072 11 00 93 911 11 00 Figure 3: Number of forest fires > 10ha. Usually, therefore, the status isa major damage event (Source: LFB, 2022) More than half ofall forest fire reports were at forest fire danger levels 4and 5. Atthe same time, these forest fire reports caused 98% (1,380ha) ofthe total seasonal damage area (see Figures 1and 2). The appropriate non-police, special hazard prevention potential was not sufficient inall operational situations exclusively atthe level ofthe responsible authorities for local fire protection and local assistance, so that in some fires the elements ofa major damage event according to Section 1 Paragraph 2No. 1of the Law on Fire Protection, Assistance and Disaster Control ofthe State of Brandenburg (BbgBKG) were met. The responsible authorities for supra-local fire protection and supra-local assistance orthe lower civil protection authorities subsequently took over the last season The special feature ofthe past year was the dimension ofthe Forest fires. Eight fires were larger than 10 hectares, four of which were larger than 100 hectares. an exceptional year. Larger damages were last recorded in 1983 and 2018 The 2022 season was with 521 forest fires anda damaged forest area of1,425.50ha5 the responsibility for hazard prevention. As Figure 3 clearly shows, the majority of forest fires (30out ofa total of38) that were classified asat least major damage events were concentrated inthe most recent observation period from 2018 to 2022. 2. Special forest fire events in 2022
cross- federal and cross-state 26.07.20228 90 Beginn and 7Settlement areas include areas with a building character (primarily residential areas, industrial and commercial areas, 12:15p.m. threatened Falkenberg/ and and Suspicion of explosive devices Treuenbrietzen PMno and02.08.2022 422 Tank fire engines from local authorities inLDS arein operation for24 hours each, as high (Forest)6 (Local communities ofBad Liebenwerda & Mühlberg/Elbe) 04.07.2022 no Lieberose/Oberspreewald LDS local authority (local community to accept areas. 19.06.2022 and January 2022 with the same distance values). yes (SN) affected Evacuation- 13:34 rung Beelitz and Liebenwerda EE Area 3:47PM 8The major disaster situation ended on9 July 2022 at10:00a.m. Until 27 June 2022, at least 223.06.2022 173 and district Liebenwerda 6The affected agricultural land and other burned areas (e.g. wasteland, set-aside areas) were not recorded statistically. Depending onthe event, several tens to hundreds of hectares of these 1:14p.m. no 9FwDV 500in the version of January 2012 according to measure group 1: Danger zone: 500m, cordoned-off area: 1,000m (currently valid FwDV 500 introduced inBB; amended FwDV 500in the version of25.07.2022 29.06.2022 316 and Eviction/ noEnd threatened Mixed-use areas and areas with a special functional character) excluding traffic and water areas (cf. https://www.ioer-monitor.de/methodik/glossar/s/ siedlungsflaeche/, accessed 07.12.2022). and Elster) destroyed 23.06.2022 Table 1: List of major damage events caused by vegetation fires in 2022. Settlement areas7 PM threatened 22.06.2022 233no 17.06.2022 yes (SN) Temperatures inthe moorland area caused embers to flare up again. 9:36a.m. EE This required compliance with safety distances9 in accordance with Since the fires could be adapted tothe respective assessment based on expert advice, direct firefighting was generally not possible. Further significant vegetation damage hadto be accepted as part ofthe balancing of interests. The use of special technology (armored Clearing equipment ofthe Bundeswehr, circular sprinklers, etc.) hadto be arranged. From the list in Table 1it is clear that the areas ofall listed major damage events were classified as areas suspected of containing explosive ordnance or even individual explosive ordnance Fire Service Regulation 500 (units inABC operations) and DGUV Information 201-027as well asthe consultation ofthe expert advice ofthe Explosive Ordnance Disposal Service ofthe Central Service ofthe Brandenburg State Police (KMBD). Although safety distances according to lasted for several days, sometimes posed a direct threat toor even affected settlement areas, and required a high level of supra-local and supra-regional forces and resources for ground and/orair- based damage control. The major operations inthe 2022 season were operations that mostly involved Compared to forest fires in recent years, there isan increasing threat to residential areas. Asa necessary consequence, clearance and evacuation measures hadto beat least prepared or even implemented. Direct firefighting onthe burnt areas became less important in light of such dynamic changes inthe hazards. Instead, a large portion ofthe forces and resources on site were diverted to Protection of residents and settlement areas.
Figure 4: Daily distribution of forest fires (Source: LFB, 2022) 208 Area (ha) 1000 120 2022 8000 16 Number 6002 20Ø 1975-2022 Number 4006 Time ofday Area (ha) 20010 Number 800 1460 2418 Area (ha) 404 22100 Area more susceptible to wind influences. 2.1. Forest fire near Treuenbrietzen OT Frohnsdorf Location description Dueto the known contamination of explosive ordnance, the first-aided forces limited themselves to defensive measures from a safe distance. The necessary resources required supra-local support, sothe Potsdam-Mittelmark district took over command ofthe operation inthe Frohnsdorf district that afternoon and treated the situation asa major incident. The fire was contained tothe area ofthe fire of 2018 until the afternoon of June 18, 2022. Along the paths around the initially affected area, Itcan also be seen that the majority of forest fires were reported between early and late afternoon. Figure 4 illustrates this by considering all 507 forest fire reports throughout the day. Daily maximum temperatures are also regularly reached during this time window. Dueto the high position ofthe sun and On June 17, 2022, a vegetation fire broke outin the Treuenbrietzen district near the Frohnsdorf district ona forest area that had already burned in 2018. Part ofthe former burnt area isthe subject of research inthe PYROPHOB project. The proportion of deadwood was very high atthe time ofthe fire. The lack ofa canopy made the open Their intensity – under clear or moderately cloudy skies – heats combustible materials and removes residual moisture. The availability of combustible material fora continuous fire process increases. Dueto the alarm and arrival times, units were only available for further measures with a delay.
Fig. 5: Destroyed forest area Frohnsdorf 2018; Source: Copernicus Emergency Management Service (© 2018 European Union), EMSR307 tothe adjacent, previously unaffected forest area. Direct firefighting was not possible here either dueto the suspicion of explosive ordnance. The fire front moved towards theB 102 federal highway and the Tiefenbrunnen district. Subsequently, blocking positions were setup along theB 102 federal highway and the evacuation of Tiefenbrunnen was prepared. Helicopters supported the containment measures. Onthe evening of June 18, 2022, the district administrator declared a state of emergency. During the night, the situation calmed slightly. From the following morning until noon, the wind picked up again and increased significantly, so that further fire spread along theB 102in the direction of Klausdorf, Frohnsdorf and Tiefenbrunnen hadto be determined. The evacuations ofthe endangered villages and communities were initiated. All available units from the district were deployed during this phase, maintaining basic security. Not all fire protection units that had already been requested onthe morning of June 19, 2022, could be deployed inthe Frohnsdorf area, but had tobe diverted dueto another large forest fire inthe Potsdam-Mittelmark district (see forest fire in Beelitz). Later on June 19, 2022, the situation stabilized dueto decreasing wind and light precipitation. The burned forest area was cleared byTo minimize fire bridges to unaffected stocks andto ensure safety atthe site Dueto shifting and increasing winds, the wildfire spread onthe afternoon of June 18, 2022 Dueto the existing explosive ordnance and the continued high burning rate ofthe standing deadwood trunks, the emergency services were at high risk, making direct follow-up firefighting operations impossible or only possible toa limited extent. Forestry technology was used to remove standing and lying dead wood from the burned area in order toThe Brandenburg State Forestry Authority estimates the area tobe 173 hectares.
- Ostprignitz-Ruppin district - Helicopters (including external fire water tanks) Brandenburg districts/independent cities: (cid:127) Bundeswehr with: - Guard and shift duty - City of Brandenburg ander Havel - Water cannons ofthe technical operations unit - Helicopter (including external fire water tanks) During the acute phases ofthe Frohnsdorf forest fire, approximately 440 emergency personnel were deployed simultaneously. Among those deployed were: - Elbe-Elster district (cid:127) LSTE and Brandenburg State Forestry Authority - armored clearing technology (cid:127) Disaster control units ofthe Potsdam-Mittelmark district: Fire protection unit - Dahme-Spreewald district (cid:127) Federal Police with: (cid:127) Disaster relief units (BSE, leadership, SEG-V, SEG-water hazards) from other (cid:127) State police with: - Coordination and supply resources for helicopter operations - District Liaison Command - City of Potsdam - Police helicopter squadron for aerial situation assessment Forces and resources deployed - Havelland district - Explosive ordnance disposal service - Coordination resources for helicopter deployment (cid:127) Local fire brigades from the Potsdam-Mittelmark district, partly aspre-structured, supra-local units (TLF platoons) for the defined support ofa local authority within the district - Teltow-Fläming district (cid:127) Emergency pastoral care (cid:127) THW with: (BSE), guided tour with SEG-Fü, SEG catering (SEG-V), SEG care (SEG-Bt), emergency pastoral care
Fig. 6: Frohnsdorf fire area 2022; Source: Copernicus Emergency Management Service (© 2022 European Union), EMSR582 - Command units During the operation near Frohnsdorf, the following special features and circumstances were observed, which influenced the course ofthe operation: (cid:127) unfavourable weather-related influences with very high outside temperatures (> 30°C), low relative humidity (around 30%) and partly gusty, shifting winds (gusts over 30km/h) (cid:127) other external service providers and non-profit aid organizations: - agricultural and forestry contractors (cid:127) Strong spot fire phenomena (flying sparks and flying sparks over the Jüterbog railway line - @fire - International Disaster Relief Germany e. V. Treuenbrietzen and the B102) (cid:127) Endangerment of settlement areas including evacuation orders for several - “Disaster Recovery Management” of Deutsche Telekom AG (cid:127) MIK Crisis Management Coordination Center Local and municipal districts (cid:127) Communication disruptions in digital radio BOS (radio cell overload dueto avoidable - FGr Emergency Supply and Emergency Repair Special features
(cid:127) Declared a state of emergency on June 18, 2022, at6:45p.m. bythe District Administrator (sofar the first state of emergency dueto a forest fire inthe state of Brandenburg since reunification). (cid:127) phased high speeds ofthe fire front with armored clearing technology ofthe Bundeswehr (cid:127) further forest fires occurring inthe vicinity ofthe large forest fire: 2.2. Forest fire near Neuseddin/Beelitz (cid:127) Suspicion of explosive ordnance or contamination (during the operation several ammunition 18 June 2022: inthe Lüdendorf/Lindow area During the response tothe Frohnsdorf forest fire, another forest fire broke outin the Potsdam-Mittelmark district west ofthe Seddin marshalling yard at noon on June 19, 2022, under weather conditions favorable for forest fires. Numerous local units from the district were already involved inthe Frohnsdorf operation. Dueto the fire's origin northwest ofa railway infrastructure crossing, both the precise location and the exploration of suitable access routes were difficult and time-consuming. These conditions favored both the spatial and intensifying spread ofthe fire. bodies of different calibers perceived onthe surface) - Location description The first-alarmed emergency services from the municipality of Seddiner See and the city of Beelitz managed (cid:127) Airborne support of firefighting by means of water extraction from open June 19, 2022: inthe Rietz/Nichel and Beelitz area (developed into another large forest fire inthe Potsdam- Mittelmark district, see2.2) Dueto its advanced extent, itwas not possible to control the fire and prevent it from spreading ina southerly direction across the Dessau railway line (east-west route). - prevent. Wind gusts of around 60km/hled to enormous speeds ofthe fire front, Waters (here: quarry lake in Treuenbrietzen): - Securing the water body with SEG water hazards - Operations hadto be coordinated bythe Technical Operations Management in Frohnsdorf - The process of requesting the Bundeswehr's airborne capability was complicated by delayed media coverage (media report from midday on June 18, 2022: Fire is under control). The Bundeswehr's decision-making body questioned the Bundeswehr's need for subsidiary support, despite the acute change inthe situation. - causal connection with large forest fire (flying sparks, flying fire) canbe excluded data traffic) and mobile communications (underserved areas) (cid:127) Parceling ofthe fire area and endangered forest areas by creating clearings
10no existing shielding connection under the overhead line orthe railway infrastructure tothe adjacent forest in- nenrands The 380 kV high-voltage overhead line and the Berlin-Jüterbog railway line both facilitated the spread ina southeasterly direction dueto the incision inthe vegetation profile10 and acted asa flow path dueto the parallel wind. A nearby The substation, which provides energy tothe surrounding settlements, wasin immediate danger. The firefighters managed to contain the fire flank directly atthe perimeter. to secure the substation and defend the facility. Additional fire protection units, already requested for the forest fire in Frohnsdorf, were diverted tothe Beelitz operational area during the march and supported the local emergency services during the acute afternoon and evening hours. Dueto the growing command organization, a technical operations command was set upin the fire station ofthe Beelitz local fire department and supported bythe command unit ofthe city's professional fire department, which was requested via the KKM. Potsdam occupied. During this time, the fire front extended over a distance of approximately (Perception of detonation noises) could only be implemented with a delay. The fire ultimately also spread over the north-south railway line Berlin-Jüterbog. Presumably Alow-vegetation energy route running from northwest to southeast. Both the corridor The main wind direction from the northwest and the which at times reached upto several hundred meters per minute. Asa result, residential areas of Beelitz-Heilstätten and Beelitz, as well asthe Hans-Joachim-von-Zieten barracks ofthe German Armed Forces, were endangered. Direct firefighting ofthe fire perimeter was impossible dueto long detours and the maintenance of safety distances in some areas. Fig. 7: Fire area Neuseddin 2022; Source: Copernicus Emergency Management Service (© 2022 European Union), EMSR582
- City of Potsdam (cid:127) LSTE and Brandenburg State Forestry Authority The tactical fire operation ignited flammable organic materials in front ofthe front line ina controlled manner, allowing the advancing fire front to flow into this targeted burnt-out area and contain it. This measure secured the settlement before the onset of rain, which finally brought the affected forest fire area to (cid:127) Bundeswehr with: - Oder-Spree district Forces and resources deployed (cid:127) Disaster relief units from the state of Berlin and the state of Saxony-Anhalt - Helicopter (including external fire water tanks) construction facilities in this area. (cid:127) Local fire brigades from the Potsdam-Mittelmark district - Guard and shift duty - Relocation ofa firefighting contingent ofthe German Federal Armed Forces (onthe wayto the fire front and the first settlement areas (approx. 100m) as well asthe disproportion of Brandenburg districts/independent cities: - Explosive ordnance disposal service - armored clearing technology The reduction of fire intensity inthe front area and the timely securing ofthe - Havelland district (cid:127) Emergency pastoral care - District Liaison Command approximately 233 hectares. - AGBF command unit 500m and now endangered a bungalow settlement, the properties ofa chicken egg producer, and several single-family homes. The inhabited properties inthe danger zone were evacuated bythe Beelitz city administration. In addition, a property defense was initiated bythe During the rapid expansion phase, upto 660 forces were deployed simultaneously: (cid:127) State police with: - Coordination resources for helicopter deployment Dueto the dimensions ofthe fire area, the time-critical distance reduction between (cid:127) Disaster relief units (BSE, leadership, SEG-V, SEG-water hazards) from other - Police helicopter squadron for aerial situation assessment ILA coverage) Dueto the size ofthe deployment site, a tactical fire operation was initiated in front ofthe endangered settlement areas onthe night of19 to20 June 2022. The tactical objective
Wind spread in forests and shrublands. Annals of Forest Science 76, 44 (2019), page 2. https://annforsci.biomedcentral. 11 CRUZ, M.G., ALEXANDER, M.E. The10% wind speed rule of thumb for estimating a wildfire’s forward rate of [m/s]) - disaster control units requested for Frohnsdorf were partly diverted onthe wayto Beelitz - Flughafengesellschaft Berlin-Brandenburg GmbH with 2 airfield fire engines (cid:127) Tactical fire deployment to quickly and effectively reduce fire intensity and (cid:127) Airborne support of firefighting by means of water extraction from open com/articles/10.1007/s13595-019-0829-8 Special features (cid:127) Suspicion of explosive devices -spread - FGr Emergency Supply and Emergency Repair (cid:127) unfavorable weather-related influences with very high outside temperatures (approx. 35°C), low relative humidity (approx. 25%) and sometimes gusty, shifting winds (gusts over 50km/h) with armored clearing technology ofthe Bundeswehr finally, provision of food through the military kitchen) (cid:127) other external service providers and non-profit aid organizations: in Lauf=0.1xv Frohnsdorf proclaimed: Potsdam-Mittelmark District Administration asthe new final authority dueto the two installed technical operations management teams: - @fire - International Disaster Relief Germany e. V. Helicopters deployed in Frohnsdorf were withdrawn to Beelitz - (cid:127) MIK Crisis Management Coordination Center bodies of water (cid:127) THW with: (cid:127) In connection with the operation at Neuseddin/Beelitz, the following knowledge was gathered and special measures were implemented: (cid:127) Parceling ofthe fire area and endangered forest areas by creating clearings (cid:127) Establishment ofa staging area inthe Hans-Joachim-von-Zieten barracks (one- - Command units (cid:127) Running speeds of300 m/min were observed inthe fire front at certain times (Note: this value corresponds tothe scientifically proven rule of thumb11 (cid:127) The District Administrator had already declared a disaster the day before dueto the incident at (cid:127) Adaptation ofthe management organization: Formation ofa disaster management team by - agricultural and forestry contractors
Altenau. Only during the night of June 24, 2022, was the situation brought under control and the forest fire area limited to approximately 316 hectares. A further approximately 80 hectares of open space - The district considered transferring the operational command tothe state. very dry air masses near the ground anda freshening, gusty wind, this Weather phenomenon for the sofar moderately spreading forest fire, aso-called ground fire, sufficient potential for revived, extreme fire behavior. (grain, fallow land) fell victim tothe flames. Ultimately, a fire tothe south moved Dueto the lack of precipitation, the fire spread from a ground blaze toa partial full-blown fire, primarily spreading north. Dueto the extreme fire dynamics, the firefighters, who were reinforced over time, withdrew from the forest area and established a defensive line along the northern border ofthe Gohrischheide nature reserve. March 2nd forest fire near Bad Liebenwerda and Mühlberg/Elbe Neighbouring grain fields were harvested or slashed to prevent the sparks from spreading further. The fire spread across theOn the afternoon of June 23, 2022, the fire department ofthe Liebenwerda municipality, located onthe Brandenburg-Saxony border, received a report ofa forest fire inthe Kröbeln district (Bad Liebenwerda municipality). After extensive investigation, the fire was localized tothe site ofthe former Zeithain military training area onthe Saxon side. A significant, verifiable contamination of explosive ordnance was detected. A defense line upto 80 meters deep was destroyed bythe strong gusts of wind. Further forest and agricultural areas were set ablaze. Emergency personnel withdrew once again and began securing the structures ofthe now threatened district of Kosilenzien (inthe municipality ofBad Liebenwerda), northeast ofthe fire, and initiating the evacuation ofthe buildings. The Elbe-Elster district administration was informed ofthe danger and damage situation and classified the operation asa major incident asof 2:30p.m. The Neuburxdorf fire station became the headquarters ofthe stationary technical operations command. The administrative staff was made targeted, early intervention difficult. Location description The evacuation ofthe Kröbeln district was prepared, but not carried out. Further significant spread to forest and The spread ofthe fire on this day was initially limited tothe Saxon side Grain fields west ofthe railway line hadto be restricted by supra-local forces in order to reduce the dangers for the villages of Neuburxdorf-Siedlung, Wendisch-Borschütz and - The performance potential of local fire protection and supra-local disaster prevention was significantly overstretched bythe twoad-hoc situations despite extensive human and material resources (rest periods for deployed forces, commitment ofown management personnel in several command posts) on32 hectares. In coordination with the Saxon operational command, the local forces ofthe association of municipalities secured the Altenau district along the north-south Falkenberg/Elster - Riesa railway line with a barrier during the evening and night hours. During the late morning of June 24, 2022, a convergence line with local severe weather potential crossed the operational area. With an outside temperature of around 30°C,
- Police helicopter squadron for aerial situation assessment Bythe evening of27 June 2022, the fire onthe Saxon side had still not been extinguished. - Dahme-Spreewald district - Oberspreewald-Lausitz district - Explosive ordnance disposal service be brought under control. Forces and resources from the Elbe-Elster district, which were involved inthe firefighting operations on Brandenburg territory, were sent tothe community of Zeithain to provide support. During this intensive resurgence ofthe - Spree-Neisse district (cid:127) Emergency pastoral care The fire once again poses a threat tothe Brandenburg region. Additional forces from the Elbe-Elster district were also alerted to this incident. A grain field fire that was developing atthe same time near the Jacobsthal district (Zeithain municipality) was dispatched with additional units and reserve firefighters from the Liebenwerda municipality, as almost all local fire departments inthe Zeithain municipality were tied upby the large forest fire. The rapid intervention eliminated the acute threat to this district. - Oder-Spree district (cid:127) Bundeswehr with: - District Liaison Command Forces and resources deployed - Barnim district - Bundeswehr Fire Brigade - City of Cottbus (cid:127) LSTE and Brandenburg State Forestry Authority During the intensive implementation of measures, upto 150 emergency personnel were deployed simultaneously. The following forces and resources were deployed onthe Brandenburg side: (cid:127) Local fire brigades from the Elbe-Elster district (cid:127) State police with: (cid:127) Disaster relief units (BSE, leadership, SEG-V, SEE-San) as well as situationally assembled platoons from the Elbe-Elster district and other Brandenburg districts/independent cities: - Guard and shift duty The fire spread to buildings ina cornfield adjacent tothe village of Kosilenzien. - City of Potsdam
Wind (cid:127) Documentation of local tornadoes/small tornadoes including burning - FGr Emergency Supply and Emergency Repair (cid:127) MIK Crisis Management Coordination Center Special features Components (spot fire danger beyond defined defense lines) - Command units In connection with the operation atBad Liebenwerda and Mühlberg/Elbe, the following knowledge was gathered and special measures were implemented: (cid:127) Adhoc assembly of inter-municipal trains with tank fire engines (from several southern Brandenburg districts) bythe Lausitz Regional Control Center to bridge the arrival times ofthe BSE (afternoon/ evening of June 24, 2022) (cid:127) other external service providers, non-profit aid organizations and special units: (cid:127) unfavourable weather-related influences with high outside temperatures (approx. 30°C), low (cid:127) Suspicion/confirmation of explosive ordnance (cid:127) Useof circular sprinklers to create an unmanned locking position - agricultural and forestry contractors relative humidity (approx. 22%) and partly gusty, shifting winds (gusts over 60km/h) (cid:127) Evacuation order inthe OT Kosilenzien, evacuation preparation inthe OF Kröbeln ha) near the Kosilenzien subdivision dueto the thickness ofthe burnt-through raw humus layer and the potential risk ofre-ignition (including endangerment ofthe subdivision) ÿ first joint operation by @fire, Waldbrandteam eVand SKVas well as practical knowledge transfer with volunteer emergency services (cid:127) In phases, running speeds of300 m/min were observed inthe fire front (Note: this value corresponds tothe scientifically proven rule of thumb11 vrun = 0.1xv (cid:127) Relocation ofa Saxon command vehicle 1 (ELW1) tothe technical operations management in Neuburxdorf with the aim of direct exchange of information on situations and measures between the operations management in Brandenburg and Saxony - @fire - International Disaster Relief Germany e. V. (cid:127) Activation ofthe administrative staff ofthe Elbe-Elster district administration - Waldbrandteam e.V. [m/s]) - SKV - Specialized vegetation fire forces (intercommunal cooperation and (cid:127) Carrying out intensive, manual extinguishing work ona fire area (approx. 22 (cid:127) THW with: Specialization ofthe towns of Zehdenick [OHV], Liebenwalde [OHV] and Templin [UM])
Upto 400 emergency personnel were deployed simultaneously inthe area. The following forces and resources were deployed, among others: Within the Schwielochsee district ofthe Lieberose/Oberspreewald district, There wasa direct threat to residential areas Atno time during the operation was this known. Given the limited technical and tactical capabilities ofthe district's volunteer fire department, supra-local command and firefighting support was called in, and the operation was classified asa major disaster. Subsequently, the fire spread to other moorland areas and adjacent forest areas. (cid:127) Local fire brigades from the Dahme-Spreewald district Inthe morning hours of July 4, 2022, a forest fire broke outon the area ofthe Natural Landscape Foundation In inaccessible areas (no developed forest path system), the firefighters slowly moved northward against the wind. On July 5, 2022, the command center decided touse reconnaissance paths that were sufficiently far from the moving fire edge fora blocking position with circular sprinklers. Open standing waters inthe indirect Brandenburg. Dueto the suspicion of explosive ordnance (part ofthe former military training area Lieberoser Heide) and the involved moorland area "Großes Zehme", Stable water intake points were provided nearby. Three centrally procured high-performance delivery systems (HFS) secured the water requirements for the circular sprinklers over a delivery distance of approximately 6km, which were positioned around several circumferential sides over a total distance of more than 4km. Itis not possible to approach the edge ofthe fire directly and thus fight the fire directly. The advantage ofthe circular sprinkler barrier was particularly appreciated inits unmanned and continuous water release. Additional sections were regularly patrolled with water-carrying vehicles. In addition, airborne firefighting measures were initiated for several days to support the fire. In inaccessible areas, the fire edge thus ran towards the wet area. The measures ledto a safe stagnation ofthe fire spread and limited the damage event toa An area of95 hectares was affected by light rainfall. Despite the handling ofthe major disaster on July 10, 2022, and the handover ofthe site tothe local authority, additional local authorities from the entire Dahme-Spreewald district were permanently deployed in shifts to support the office for weeks. Location description The local fire department units ofthe district were initially alerted tothe scene ofthe incident in accordance with the alarm and dispatch regulations, assembled ata designated staging area, and conducted a comprehensive reconnaissance ofthe area. The fire area with slow toThe fire was handed over tothe landowner on July 26, 2022. Until August 16, 2022, further alarms were issued irregularly within the office dueto ember pockets that continually reignited. moderate spread was located within an area classified as suspected of containing explosive ordnance. The fire department leadership and the district fire chief ofthe Dahme-Spreewald district Forces and resources deployed 2.4. Forest fire near Lieberose OT Butzen decided to prioritize defense measures for unaffected wilderness areas over the intact
- Police helicopter squadron for aerial situation assessment - FGr Emergency Supply and Emergency Repair - Teltow-Fläming district - Command units (cid:127) Federal Police with: - Spree-Neisse district - Coordination and supply resources for helicopter operations - HFS units from BAR, LOS and LDS Trains from the Dahme-Spreewald district and other Brandenburg districts/independent cities: - Barnim district - District Liaison Command (cid:127) MIK Crisis Management Coordination Center - Märkisch-Oderland district - Guard and shift duty (cid:127) THW with: The large forest fire inthe wilderness area ofthe Brandenburg Nature Landscape Foundation has produced the following findings and impressions: - Potsdam-Mittelmark district - Explosive ordnance disposal service - FGr Rooms (cid:127) Unmanned circular sprinkler bar and water delivery systems: - Oberspreewald-Lausitz district - Helicopters (including external fire water tanks) (cid:127) Disaster relief units (BSE, leadership, SEG-V) as well as situationally assembled - Oder-Spree district (cid:127) Bundeswehr with: - Circular sprinkler from LOS, EEand TF (with AB forest) - City of Cottbus & City of Potsdam (cid:127) State police with: (cid:127) LSTE and Brandenburg State Forestry Authority Special features - Barnim district
- However, itwas found that the follow-up extinguishing efforts from the air to extinguish the fire inthe depths (ember pockets inthe moor soil or deep humus layer) were not effective. (cid:127) The topographical terrain profile can also have significant effects onthe dispersion behavior inthe state of Brandenburg, despite the apparently small level differences. (cid:127) The use ofHFS units and circular sprinklers has proven tobe practical in this application and proved useful: - The coordination of aircraft by trained air coordinators was The terrain relief, characterized by moraines, influenced the local wind conditions. - However, the Teerofensee (HFS water intake point) lost about 0.5m of water. rated positively. An unusual phenomenon was the emergence ofa second fire front, which was still less intense than the downwind front, against the main wind direction. stand. 2.5. Forest fire near Falkenberg/Elster A week-long series of fires inthe area ofthe Rehfeld wind farm inthe municipality of Falkenberg/Elster reached its peak with another forest fire report inthe early afternoon hours of July 25, 2022. In addition to enormous area losses, the fire also spread to buildings. (cid:127) The mission tied upthe predominantly volunteer forces (particularly from LDS) with varying numbers of participants for almost a month. - Itis important to question whether persistent annual rainfall deficits will have a counterproductive, irreversible effect on surface waters used for large-volume firefighting water supplies. Location description - Such favorable conditions (surface waters near the site of operation with sufficient access) cannot be expected across all forest areas inthe state of Brandenburg. Inthe early afternoon, a forest fire developed ona windward side ofa (cid:127) In addition tothe regular disaster relief units, modular units from LDS (e.g. Personnel module) as well as situationally assembled units from SPN regularly inthe (cid:127) Firefighting support from the air was used to temporarily contain the Ordered to deploy. Effective in burning litter and upper raw humus layer: (cid:127) Despite the moderate weather conditions for the summer months, the wildfire was able to spread to almost 100 hectares dueto the concrete suspicion of explosive ordnance and burn deep into the moor and raw humus layer. (cid:127) Predominantly defensive measures were implemented to protect the unaffected wilderness areas. Part ofthe area was deliberately abandoned (balancing ofthe interests of protection) and left to burn.
12An inter-municipal firefighting assistance agreement for early mutual support already existed between the Verbandsgemeinde Liebenwerda (BB) and the municipalities of Beilrode and Arzberg (both SN). The municipal association's operations management notified the district ofthe declaration ofa major disaster and requested additional disaster control units from other lower disaster control authorities. At this time, supra-local resources from the Elbe-Elster and North Saxony districts had already been deployed. Additional firefighting trains with tank fire engines from the regional control center area, assembled bythe Lausitz control center, were dispatched inthe afternoon. The uncontrollable forest fire continued to spread northeastward through the Rehfeld wind farm inthe late afternoon. Dueto the burning black areas absorbing sunlight, the overheating near the ground created its own thermals, drawing burning components across the light canopy. In addition, straw lying on harvested grain fields ignited and was set ablaze bythe wind. and managed to escape atthe last moment. In this action, seven emergency personnel suffered Smoke inhalation and minor burns. The emergency vehicle was significantly damaged bythe heat. Red-hot and burning materials were carried more than 500m downwind and deposited on combustible, thermally treated wasteland and grain land. Atthe same time, the evacuation ofthe districts of Rehfeld and Kölsa with Kölsa settlement was ordered. These "daughter fires" endangered the railway infrastructure (Falkenberg/Elster - Leipzig railway line) as well asthe town of Rehfeld (including the individual properties along State Road 60 between Rehfeld and Kölsa). Inthe evening, around 7p.m., a convergence line crossed the area. Rapidly increasing wind speeds ofup to approximately 80km/hand a change in wind direction from northeast to east caused extreme fire spread locally asa result of intensive radio surveillance anda wide, fully blazing band. The vegetation fire spread toa stable wing ofa piglet breeding facility near Kölsa-Siedlung Apparently safe areas were destroyed bythe fire over a distance of approximately 500m and spread to other areas upto the property boundaries of single-family homes inthe Kölsa settlement. The restructuring ofthe operational sections dueto the withdrawal now had to also take into account the building fires and hazards. The spread ofthe complex fire to other stable sections was successfully prevented, aswas the fire jumped over and ignited previously unaffected vegetation areas that were connected to structural Facilities adjacent. Dueto the suppressed smoke (presumably downdrafts) and the ash and dust swirling over the entire scene, the emergency services inand around the forest had the opportunity to forest area with a sparse to wide crown closure anda high level of calamity timber felling. The first-arriving firefighters from the Elbe-Elster district and the Nordsachsen district12 quickly identified a very rapid spread and immediately requested additional forces and resources. Attempts to contain the fire in areas with little vegetation failed dueto increasing winds and increasing sun intensity. Just 45 minutes after the operation was initiated (1:28p.m.), the fire department on site recommended A confusing picture. Because there wasa real danger of being trapped bythe fire, orders to withdraw were issued from the operational areas. The crew ofa tank fire engine drove through an intense fire area in very poor visibility.
Fig. 8: Fire area Rehfeld/Kölsa 2022; Source: Copernicus Emergency Management Service (© 2022 European Union), EMSR611. - Potsdam-Mittelmark district However, inthe stable. Atthe same time, a stationary, The affected forest area was cleared after completion ofthe operational measures on2 August 2022 with 422 hectares were reported. Approximately another 400 hectares of heathland, grain, and fallow land burned. A fully occupied passenger train was reported near the village of Rehfeld. The suddenly dying wind changed after about 15 minutes from east to southeast and favored a more moderate course in Forces and resources deployed: larger, poorly developed departments inthe direction of Falkenberg-Lönnewitz airfield. During the acute threat response inthe dynamic operational phase, upto 550 emergency personnel were deployed simultaneously: (cid:127) Local fire brigades from the Elbe-Elster district These areas are designated as areas suspected of containing explosive ordnance. ofthe requested regional support units (especially BSE, TLF trains) inthe evening and (cid:127) Disaster protection units (BSE, leadership, SEG-V, SEG-water hazards) and situational During the night, the other danger spots around Kölsa and the airfield were addressed. Final containment and securing ofthe fire perimeter areas was only possible compiled trains from other Brandenburg districts/independent cities: transition to residential development. A large number of livestock inthe affected area died Inthe following days, additional disaster control units, armoured clearance equipment and airborne support measures were deployed onthe Brandenburg and Saxon sides, while fires were developing in inaccessible forest areas.
- District Liaison Command (cid:127) other external service providers and non-profit aid organizations: (cid:127) State police with: - @fire - International Disaster Relief Germany e. V. combat and reconnaissance/coordination from the air - Police helicopter squadron for aerial situation assessment - armored clearing technology Special features - Uckermark district (cid:127) LSTE and Brandenburg State Forestry Authority (cid:127) THW with: (cid:127) unfavourable weather-related influences with high outside temperatures (approx. 36°C), low relative humidity (approx. 27%) and partly gusty, rotating winds (gusts over 80km/h) and three wind direction changes within four hours onthe dayof the eruption - Oberspreewald-Lausitz district (cid:127) Bundeswehr with: - Command units (cid:127) Disaster relief units from the Free State of Saxony and the state of Saxony-Anhalt - Helicopter (including external fire water tanks) to support fire fighting - agricultural and forestry contractors (cid:127) MIK Crisis Management Coordination Center - Guard and shift duty - Coordination resources for helicopter deployment - Oberhavel district - Explosive ordnance disposal service - Bundeswehr Fire Brigade In connection with the operation at Falkenberg/Elster, the following knowledge was gathered and special measures were implemented: - Dahme-Spreewald district (cid:127) Emergency pastoral care from several districts - FGr Emergency Supply and Emergency Repair (cid:127) At times, running speeds of several hundred meters per minute were observed inthe fire front (Note: this value corresponds tothe scientifically proven - Spree-Neisse district
spread in forests and shrublands. Annals of Forest Science 76, 44 (2019), page 2. https://annforsci.biomedcentral. 13CRUZ, M.G., ALEXANDER, M.E. The10% wind speed rule of thumb for estimating a wildfire’s forward rate of Wind difficult to access forest areas south ofthe federal highway (creation ofa safe [m/s]) (cid:127) Suspicion/confirmation of explosive ordnance (cid:127) Useof circular sprinklers to create an unmanned barrier position along the control line) Federal Highway B183 (cid:127) Documentation of downdraft phenomena and extreme fire thermals (including axial rotation ofthe main smoke column during the passage ofthe convergence line) (cid:127) Evacuation order inthe OT Rehfeld, Kölsa with Kölsa settlement com/articles/10.1007/s13595-019-0829-8 (cid:127) Destruction potential within a narrow time window and dimension ofthe destructive (cid:127) Relocation ofa Saxon command vehicle 1 (ELW1) tothe Technical Operations Management in Falkenberg/ Elster with the aim of direct exchange of information on situations and measures between the operational management in Brandenburg and Saxony (later also mutual deployment of liaison officers) (cid:127) Activation ofthe administrative staff ofthe Elbe-Elster district administration area (largest forest fire ofthe 2022 season) (cid:127) Risk of emergency services being trapped dueto sudden changes in weather conditions (cid:127) Controlled burning ofthe open land area onthe former runway (cid:127) Good fire water supply (fire water wells) distributed throughout the operational area through structural energy generation systems (as part ofthe approval process for wind turbines inthe forest andPV systems atthe airfield) ofthe Falkenberg-Lönnewitz airfield (running parallel tothe B183) to secure the Rule of thumb13 vrun= 0.1xv (cid:127) Ad-hoc assembly of inter-municipal trains with tank fire engines (from several southern Brandenburg districts) bythe Integrated Regional Control Center Lausitz to bridge the arrival times ofthe BSE (afternoon/evening of July 25, 2022)
Tank fire engine forest fire type Brandenburg 14Preparation ofa seasonal national plan for disaster control units and the current configuration ofthe (cid:127) better coordination ofall preventive forest fire protection and firefighting measures, as well asthe optimization ofthe provision of central technical equipment. In addition tothe forest fires, which were quickly contained and their destructive potential suppressed, the large forest fires described above placed a particularly heavy burden onthe integrated emergency response system for special hazard prevention inthe state of Brandenburg. Above all, the structures, which are predominantly based on volunteers, formed the backbone ofthe response to dangers and damage to people, animals, the environment, and property. and the MIL will examine further steps in coordination with the federal government. The fire behavior ofthe Season 2022 in connection with the immediate threats tothe population andIn the mutual dependence of preventive forest fire protection and defensive forest The operational management and ensured a coordinated implementation of measures appropriate tothe circumstances. The proven cooperation and support ofthe Federal Police and the Bundeswehr, as well asthe deployment ofthe THWin recent major disasters, is evident. settlement areas has made it clear that further optimization steps will be necessary, The 2022 forest fire season inthe state of Brandenburg could reveal a predicted trend that could result ina more severe risk picture in this and the coming decades. in order to adequately meet future challenges. In this context, interdisciplinary and inter-agency cooperation must be further intensified. The years since 2018 have already generated an intense awareness ofthe threats posed by vegetation fires, which has led to organizational and technical developments14 in vegetation firefighting inthe state of Brandenburg. In Brandenburg, evaluating the experiences from the forest fire years 2018 and 2019, a concentrated process of improving organizational and operational requirements for effective forest firefighting was initiated. Likewise, the MLUK has worked with the LFB In order to prepare the structures and technical and organizational arrangements inthe country for future To further optimize forest fire events and develop forest fire prevention based on current scientific findings, the creation ofa Forest Fire Competence Center was proposed atthe 2023 Forest Fire Summit, with the objective of: Numerous preventive forest fire protection measures have been implemented. The state has extensively supported both the measures for improved forest fire fighting and preventive forest fire protection measures. From the perspective ofthe state of Brandenburg, a federal funding program for forest fire barriers to protect villages is needed, (cid:127) improving forest fire prevention, to support municipalities and private owners in particular in implementing the measures mentioned. The federal government has also assisted inthe preparation ofa hazard and risk analysis onthe potential hazard of Brandenburg's towns and municipalities for forest fires. (cid:127) better planning of forest fire fighting operations and further assistance is offered, the initiative is welcomed bythe State of Brandenburg 3. Conclusions and optimization potential
15Information and communication units (rapid response command support group according tothe administrative regulations ofthe Ministry ofthe Interior and for Local Affairs for the implementation ofthe regulation on units and Disaster management facilities tothe specialist management service from 16 December 2022) However, for such an implementation, itis necessary that the plans for the second school location ofthe LSTE are prioritized according tothe urgent need and Appropriate funds must be allocated tothe state budget in order to create appropriate conditions for such a forest fire competence center. Otherwise The competence center would simply take upthe tasks ofthe previous forest fire working group and individual participants would be supplemented as needed. The Forest Fire Competence Center could subsequently primarily conduct conceptual foundational work in preventive and defensive forest fire protection. In addition, relevant data and information could be prepared and accessed ina situation-oriented manner (e.g., digital situation maps and images, dashboard evaluations of past incidents, digital data analyses, etc.). However, the departments and subordinate authorities and institutions dealing with forest fire prevention and fire fighting donot currently have the time and personnel resources to bring together the various fields of action inthe required thematic depth andto revise them conceptually. The spatial resources tobe provided could be pooled from the areas ofthe MLUK, the MIK, the DWD, the KMBD, the LSTE, and the area of science and research. The Forest Fire Competence Center could then facilitate institutional development and pooling of interdisciplinary forest fire expertise inthe state of Brandenburg. For this purpose, the establishment ofa Brandenburg Forest Fire Competence Center atthe Wünsdorf location isa suitable option, as important expertise is already available locally with the LSTE's second school location, the State Forestry Authority, and the Central Police Service, including the KMBD, thus achieving significant synergy effects. Asfar asthe Forest Fire Competence Centre is provided with the necessary personnel, financial and For firefighting, coordination between the MIK and the MLUK is essential. The Forest Fire Competence Center will beset upon an interdisciplinary basis, distinguishing between permanent full- time staff and temporary members. The concrete design ofthe Forest Fire Competence Center will require further coordination among the relevant departments. 3.1. Leadership organization/management Based onthe findings, the Forest Fire Competence Center could also provide support in training LSTE in vegetation fire fighting. The command and IuK15 units (command and specialist service) ofthe lower disaster control authorities are performing significant work in organizing and structuring the operational measures and the operational area during the large-scale forest fires. In addition to their own units in their respective areas of responsibility, units from other lower disaster control units were also deployed at limited intervals in accordance with the state's seasonal planning.
a24-hour operation 17for example, in supply, catering, procurement, planned replacement of units Support of forest fire-affected, lower disaster control authorities during the forest fire season for16-day planning of management, ICT and fire protection units among the districts for solidarity 18for example inthe LSTE seminar on vegetation fire fighting the days following the start ofthe operation) has placed great demands on these units. Ascan be seen from the example of Stakeholders were not informed ina sustainable manner, so that replacing units were exposed to avoidable problem clarifications.17Due tothe constant changeover with new personnel after 12to 24 hours, the management organization was extensively, but not always necessarily, restructured, asthe initiating managers were not fully aware ofthe prior knowledge and reasons for the decisions. Certain special maps (e.g., the LFB's forest deployment maps currently provided inthe data cloud), which are relevant for situation analysis at various management levels, are difficult to research and, despite regular presentations, are partly unknown tothe user group. The various geoportals ofthe state (e.g., Geoportal Forst Brandenburg, Geoportal Brandenburg) require extensive knowledge in their web application for the preparation of usable map sections and are partly limited by technical configurations. Asis clear from the almost parallel events inthe Potsdam-Mittelmark district, several of these command units maybe required simultaneously. The command and ICT units are designed fora 24-hour support mission (sometimes only 12 hours inthe case ofa The required scope of applications is limited and not intuitive touse. Furthermore, the web applications are not available in cases of weak ornon-existent mobile network coverage. internal personnel changes inthe supporting management unit) in order to relieve the personnel burden onthe local management department. Solution 1: A uniform management software used throughout the state of Brandenburg (currently being introduced: CommandX) will be used to optimise shift handovers 3.1.1. Situation analysis, information deficits and shift handovers initiating and assuming management units (keyword: management personnel & ICT personnel according to seasonal state planning) by ensuring better traceability of decisions and measures taken through keyword searches and digital deployment logs. Furthermore, networking of various instances (local authorities, district, state) is possible and allows for role- and rights-dependent During the daily shift changes between the units being released and the units being relieved, even with disciplined handovers, there is regularly a loss of mission-relevant information, which subsequently makes it difficult to trace the actions taken orto be taken. In addition tothe exclusive 24-hour deployment of this special personnel, the reason lies inthe heterogeneous information processing and Situational awareness is justified. In addition, the supporting command units and affected districts currently use various analog and digital situational awareness products. Adhoc use and reuse of various software products bythe nung16 is providing support inthe affected districts. The dynamics ofthe situation (partly also atThe necessary prior briefings and training, combined with the dynamic nature ofthe situation, could notbe ensured bythe respective replacement units, resulting in information losses. In addition, accessibility and procedures toand from mission- relevant
(e.g. 2-shift model with 12h rotation or3-shift model with 8h rotation or staggered individual function changes) Units and facilities ofthe civil protection (Civil Protection Ordinance - KatSV) for the specialist service 20Administrative regulation ofthe Ministry ofthe Interior and Local Government for the implementation ofthe regulation on 19depending onthe frequency of high-stress phases and the resulting cognitive load onthe forces Guided tour (VV-Fü) from 16 December 2022 Proposed solution 3: The current, exclusive 24-hour deployment period for command and ICT personnel must be further evaluated. To reduce information loss during shift handovers within an appropriate shift model19, itis necessary to examine whether the pool of command and command support personnel canor must be increased in principle beyond 24 hours inthe operational area. However, itis the responsibility ofthe operational command to request additional replacement personnel atan early stage to ensure a seamless transition. This allows for the useof a consistent staff base and minimizing training and information deficits ina rotating shift model (appropriate deployment and rest times inthe operational area). This increase in effectiveness and continuity could, for example, be achieved bytwo equivalent units working in shifts over a period of48 hours (see also 3.2.1 Deployment and replacement times ofthe disaster relief units/ sustainability). Asa minimal approach, only a core of personnel from selected functions could be deployed fora longer period (>24 hours). and description. Furthermore, key leadership needs must be assessed jointly with the KKM. In some cases, the affected task authorities have explicitly requested and requested leadership support services from the LSTE. a change in operational management from local to supra-local level. can simplify intuitive use, but also increase acceptance, connectivity, and awareness. To defragment geodata information, the Geodata Infrastructure for Authorities and Organizations with Security Tasks inthe State of Brandenburg (GDI-BOSBB) project must be further promoted across all jurisdictions as part ofthe introduction ofa uniform management software. Solution 2: Required data and map services must be easier to provide and use. Native and web- app-enabled map services for smartphones Insight into the developed command organization as well asan overview ofthe deployed units. Already documented operational information (e.g. section formation, deployed forces and resources with location and start of operation) can also be transferred seamlessly to3.1.2. KKM liaison staff (on-call system) Since 2018, the LSTE has been providing liaison officers for the state government's Crisis Management Coordination Center (KKM) inthe event of major disasters or catastrophes. This system has proven successful and serves asa means of exchanging information at short notice. between the operational command and the state asthe highest disaster control authority. Atthe same time, the liaison officers specify and supplement requirements for forces and resources, and quickly clarify queries via short communication lines. Furthermore, the liaison officers support the requesting authorities in conveying capabilities. (including rest periods) remain inthe operational area. The Mobile Command Support Units (MoFüstE) tobe established within the LSTE and within the regional control center areas could represent a central service complement.
will be reduced by three to five hours dueto the daily setup and dismantling as well asthe training. Assignments outside of regular working hours were ensured. During periods of high forest fire danger, concrete personnel planning for the LSTE inthe form ofan on-call system was not regularly mandated asa preparatory measure. Many initial requests were made after hours oron weekends, making recruiting at short notice challenging. Inthe case ofa pre-planned, 24-hour deployment ofa disaster control unit inan operational area, arrival and departure times must also be added, so that an operation actually lasts 24 hours plus X hours (e.g. fire protection unit [BSE] UM travels toEE ÿ24 h operation + 6-8 hours total marching time). Within the24-hour operation, Proposed solution: Inthe course ofthe expected increase in support services ofthe LSTE inthe event of vegetation fires (including the provision of special equipment such as55 m³ appropriate rest periods in suitable rest areas must be taken into account. In some cases, an internal personnel change takes place after a12-hour deployment ina BSE, which Extinguishing water extraction tanks and command support) the introduction ofan on-call system and its conditions (for example depending onthe forest fire danger level during the forest fire season) should be examined. bythe sending local authorities independently. However, there were also missions in which BSE and its personnel were deployed for24 hours plus the arrival and departure time before 3.2. Capability organization/management The duty of care ofthe deployed personnel must also be taken into account, which iswhy sufficient machine operators must be deployed. In particular, the machine operators must be given suitable rest opportunities and periods for regeneration before participating in public traffic in order to avoid microsleep andto exclude similar things during journeys with the emergency vehicles. The deployment of disaster control units to relieve the burden on local fire departments andto increase hazard prevention potential has become established in recent forest fire years. The seasonal pre- planning of disaster control units (specialized services management with ICT and fire protection), which has been carried out for years across all Brandenburg districts, offers those involved planning security and enables a high level of availability of personnel and equipment. At least for the 2022 forest fire season, itcan be stated that the volunteer system of disaster control is being strengthened bythe high frequency of deployments in reached its limits ina short period of time from June to July 2022. In some cases, units from neighboring federal states were requested and deployed tothe Brandenburg operational areas to provide support (e.g. inthe town of Beelitz and the Verbandsgemeinde In addition, after a24-hour operation, the fittings used (especially distributors, jet pipes, but also suction and pressure hoses) are dismantled and taken away. Liebenwerda). After arriving and being briefed onthe area, the relieving BSE team reassembles all the fittings, which isa time-consuming process. Regular work during a24-hour BSE deployment The availability ofthe LSTE liaison officers was confirmed at short notice via voluntary 3.2.1. Resilience ofthe disaster relief units
24-hour operational area. 21This could include increasing the sustainability ofa disaster management unit beyond the practiced district as well as from neighboring districts and independent cities to determine the marching times could also be collected during shift changes of command units (see also 3.1.1and to transfer itto a shift model of operational and rest periods inthe operational area. A suitable shift model must be selected between the units on site, This takes into account the physical strain onthe emergency services, the logistical effort required for the changeover, and the time ofthe changeover (changeover at night is unsuitable). The KKM should be informed of this in order to facilitate possible coordination21 between all participating lower civil protection authorities (e.g., through video conferences). and routes and therefore did not directly correspond tothe deployment preamble ofa BSE. However, these TLF platoons bridged the marching times ofthe BSE during critical operational phases and successfully supplemented the local units while maintaining the Situation analysis, information deficits and shift handovers). Congruent processes were Within the framework ofthe planned shift models, itis also necessary to check to what extent the material and technology used initially remain atthe site and are passed onto the following shift local basic protection. also found inthe catering units: The daily assembly and disassembly of nationwide canbe handed over. In this respect, subsequent return and, if necessary, repair must be ensured. Proposed solution: Itis necessary to evaluate whether a separate TLF train should be provided for each district, similar tothe The use ofthe same field cooking technology bythe triggering and replacing rapid response group catering (SEG-V) proved tobe a reduction in efficiency. 3.2.2. Inter-municipal TLF trains (TLF-Sofort) During this forest fire season, large forest fires repeatedly resulted inad hoc alerts for water-carrying vehicles (tank fire engines - TLF) to provide mobile firefighting water supplies in conjunction with direct firefighting. TLF units from several local authorities and other agencies (in this case, the Federal Fire Service) were assembled as needed to initiate concentrated firefighting measures along the fire perimeter. This combined unit resembled Proposed solution: Within the framework ofthe duty of care and efficient mission processing Alternative options and uniform specifications for the 24-hour to multi-day deployment ofa disaster control unit (in particular, specialist services for management, fire protection, and support) must be identified. The24-hour state planning remains in place until the event, independent of alternative options, but requires continuous review. The responsible operations command must derive a forecast ofthe expected total duration ofthe emergency response operation as early as possible within the framework ofthe situation assessment. Ifthe forecast duration ofthe operation exceeds 24 hours, it must be examined whether shift-capable reinforcement (additional, basically the first sign ofa defined BSE, but these represented a special simultaneous BSEin the operational area) oran internal BSE personnel exchange (extension ofthe Ability for immediate intervention. The units came from both the affected gert. The overall effectiveness ofthe deployed units decreases. Similar findings Deployment time beyond 24 hours) canbe carried outin order to ensure the24-hour deployment ofa unit
In addition to vegetation fire operations, they are intended tobe used in other major disasters/ catastrophes such as floods and train accidents. Examples include the module developments inthe Dahme-Spreewald district. The BSE will be divided into canbe provided in order to implement timely response measures (approx. 2 hours after alarm) inthe adjacent orown area of responsibility to avert danger inthe event ofthe administrative regulation ofthe Ministry ofthe Interior and for Local Affairs for the implementation ofthe Ordinance onthe Units and Facilities of Civil Protection for the Fire Protection Service (VV- BS) of16 December 2022. The disadvantage here isthe differentiated overall strength ofthe unit, which, inthe case of shift replacements and the simultaneous lack of transmission ofthe district- specific lists of planning challenges (e.g. equal section allocation, supply/catering). It proved advantageous forest fires without undermining basic protection inone'sown or neighboring local authority. The deployment time of such aTLF train, which isto be defined, In most cases, the greater overall tactical operational value ofthe additional units. By forming modules ofthe same size, the lower disaster control authorities were able to react flexibly tothe operational situation and local circumstances and also install timely self-sufficiency capabilities. For example, inthe Dahme-Spreewald district, a module should not exceed 12 hours dueto thead hoc alert. Within this time frame, an organized follow-up (personnel inquiries, compilation of catering, supply and accommodation components, marching times) of required BSE Emergency personnel were called into manually setup a kilometer-long, unmanned circular sprinkler system. tobe expected. Similar processes exist inpre-hospital emergency rescue inthe event ofa mass casualty incident (MCI) with supra-local MCI emergency aid. Proposed solution: TheVV-Kats explicitly allows an extension ofthe BSE, so that the Description of operational modules as special capability additions is permissible. 3.2.3. Development of capability modules for fire protection units The fire protection units (BSE) ofthe Fire Protection Department have provided valuable personnel and technical support tothe affected local authorities during the last major forest fires since 2018. The disaster control unit concentrates mobile and semi-mobile firefighting capabilities using water- carrying tank fire engines (a total of approximately In order to maintain the uniformity and comparability of tactical capabilities ofthe BSE throughout the country, it should be examined whether the additions canbe described ina concept catalogue 24,000 liters of extinguishing water), firefighting or defense via stationary firefighting vehicles, as well as water supply over long distances (a total of approximately 3,200m ofB-pressure hose) inthe case of vegetation fires. Additional command vehicles complement the unit, which comprises at least 73 emergency personnel. Asa result ofthe events since 2018, some fire service and disaster control leaders considered the capabilities, which are organized into platoons, tobe too rigid and not integrable in every situation. and can therefore be adapted bythe lower disaster control authorities. The idea of greater flexibility could thus bemet, since the BSE TLF trains ofthe professional fire brigades inthe country (including command vehicle) for immediate support Asa result, various lower disaster control units supplemented the BSE with personnel and technology. A heterogeneous BSE structure emerged inthe country, which differed from the minimum
The increased frequency ofuse of manned and unmanned aircraft in recent years has resulted inthe development ofthe function ofthe air coordinator in Brandenburg. For this purpose, a special course is offered atthe LSTE "Technical Advisor and Air Coordinator at fire and disaster relief sites." The following training content, among others, must be learned within 5 days: legal basis, command organization, accident prevention, helicopter deployment bythe police and armed forces - meteorology, map reading, radio - plan exercises, practical instruction. This function serves the operations command asa technical advisor and the air section management in order to evaluate the special measures and requirements ofair support andto initiate them on behalf ofthe mission. However, it should be noted that the short-term availability of manned aircraft cannot be guaranteed atall times orcan be delayed in some cases dueto the statutory primary mission ofthe dispatching BOS. after the highly dynamic operational phases. To make matters worse, air support was occasionally requested atKKM inthe late afternoon and evening hours, so that with the onset of darkness, only a short operational duration ofthe rotary-wing aircraft Limited decision-making powers and skepticism about cost coverage maybe considered as possible causes. TLF component), fire water supply, technical train, emergency services and logistics. Aerial support for reconnaissance and firefighting purposes in forest fires has increased significantly and gained importance in recent years. Depending onthe operational circumstances, this can provide valuable information for assessing the situation atan early stage, and from this, effective measures canbe taken to reduce the spread of fire in difficult-to-access or particularly vulnerable areas. Currently, helicopters ofthe BOS (Brandenburg State Police, Federal Police, and Bundeswehr) are being used in particular. Drones procured by municipalities or provided byaid organizations have supplemented aerial reconnaissance measures inthe past. Above all, aerial firefighting measures can only be understood as support for ground-based measures. The potential for explosive ordnance tobe released asa result of heat exposure must be considered three-dimensional and pose a safety threat to aircraft crews. 3.3. Airborne support integrated into the modules of readiness management (two-stage), fire fighting (LF component in each case, For airborne, qualitative reconnaissance purposes, rotorcraft from the helicopter squadron ofthe The Brandenburg State Police deployed the helicopter. Furthermore, the helicopter allows for the transport ofan additional observer. Previously used helicopter and drone images tieup the few specialists experienced in technical analysis, requiring considerable time and delays to manually extract essential information and operational priorities from these data sets. This season, airborne coordination ofthe measures was carried out for the first time with a Bundeswehr SAR helicopter during the3.3.1. Aerial reconnaissance A major forest fire in Falkenberg/Elster was successfully tested. This approach increased the efficiency of extinguishing water drops. However, the use of lifting
The function ofair coordinator inthe state of Brandenburg has been significantly upgraded, further management functions are required for clear coordination between the ground-based However, the joint useof helicopters and drones requires considerable coordination and coordination. 3.3.2. Request procedure for air-based measures The requirements regime ofthe flying BOS deployed sofar inthe state of Brandenburg 22 https://www.optsal.de/ Proposed solution: To conserve resources and ensure the availability of this special technology for During the initial request, some were perceived astoo lengthy. Early air support can significantly reduce damage. For the primary, statutory purpose, drone concepts ready for implementation have already been developed for future reconnaissance purposes (mapping of burnt areas, perimeter determination including evaluation ofthe risk of spread atthe fire edges, hotspot search) within contribute when ground-based units are considered insufficient. The deployment of aircraft for firefighting from the air after the day ofthe fire outbreak should be critically questioned in some situations. Rather, the operational focus must beof the State of Brandenburg, so that a funding ofone equipment vehicle drone for each lower civil protection authority with a flat-rate subsidy of70% ofthe costs in 2025 and 2026 will be provided. Further issues within the State of Brandenburg early integration and availability of aircraft. Proposed solution: The communication and procedural processes ofthe currently used request channels must be reviewed for optimization potential. Atthe very least, the request form should be evaluated with a view to making it more intuitive to fill out with fewer free text components. should be evaluated. One example is OPTSAL22 ofthe German Aerospace Center (DLR) with its project partner EUROCOMMAND. The use of satellite images, for example, via the European Union's Copernicus Earth monitoring program, is useful, but may be subject toa delay in availability (request via the GMLZ; the next possible, cloud-free overflight maybe the next day). In this respect, new technological developments for airborne reconnaissance must be included inthe overall assessment, which offer real added value andan increase in effectiveness for3.3.3. Determination of drop zones Indication of operational priorities (software-based evaluation of aerial photographs to determine the situational vegetation and its condition [residual moisture content, crop density, condition/seasonal cultivation on agricultural land]) and thus for the tactical concentration of units. In addition, in special operational situations Although the coordination of helicopters for firefighting support bythe The use of drones for this task would be associated with considerable costs. Consideration should therefore be given to integrating drones even more extensively for such reconnaissance and coordination tasks inthe future. to consider the possibilities ofair coordination from a light multi-purpose helicopter with thermal imaging sensors in order to improve airdrops.
3.3.4 Involvement of service providers During the highly dynamic operational phases, thead hoc availability of manned aircraft from the emergency services was not always possible dueto the statutory primary mandate ofthe dispatching emergency services, orin some cases, itwas only possible with a delay. Dueto the expected increase in extreme fire behavior during vegetation fires inthe medium term, early intervention by ground and/orair units can lead to operational success, as future fire factors are likely to make the fire uncontrollable just afew hours after it breaks out. Proposed solution: Asan alternative tothe flying BOS units, the contractual The involvement of service providers should be examined. As part of permanent availability, rotary- wing aircraft from private providers could be used during the forest fire season (if necessary). rely on current maps of suspected explosive ordnance sites. Itis necessary to examine the possibilities for integrating such a tool. The CommandX management software and the geodata infrastructure for BOS (GDI-BOSBB) are particularly in focus. Furthermore, options with the Brandenburg State Surveying and Geoinformation Agency (LGB) and the Brandenburg State Forestry Agency (LFB) are being evaluated. Proposed solution: For the transmission and coordination of aerial water drops, suitable maps (e.g., forest fire maps with areas suspected of containing explosive ordnance) should be provided with a dense grid of quadrants. An example of this isthe open-source situation visualization solution23 with a grid layer. The air coordinator and the aircraft crews are required. Clear communication ofthe situational drop target areas and the effectiveness ofthe extinguishing water drops can only be achieved with difficulty using coordinates for both the air coordinator and the aircraft crew. Furthermore, for their own safety, the aircraft crews are The possibilities for using such service providers should also be examined, especially by districts at risk of forest fires. This should also include consideration ofthe integration and responsibilities during operations (liability issues, position within the command organization, authority to issue instructions, technical and organizational communication requirements). However, this entails considerable costs in terms of maintaining the reserve, which municipalities are generally unable to cover. At least in Brandenburg, the state lacks the necessary authority to allocate operational resources for aerial firefighting below the threshold ofa disaster. Therefore, the above-mentioned proposal should be examined to determine whether andto what extent additional aircraft models for vegetation firefighting canbe procured jointly with the federal government. The procurement of five additional helicopters for the Federal Police under Proportional cost sharing bythe states could increase the availability of appropriate operational resources within the Federal Police. The states' cost sharing should not result in additional operational costs, which would shorten decision-making processes and, if necessary, allow fora low-threshold deployment tobe initiated atan early stage. However, this would require broad consensus between the federal and state governments. 23 http://lavisu.de/
The cooperation between the Explosive Ordnance Disposal Service ofthe Brandenburg State Police Central Service (KMBD), authorities and organizations ofnon-police emergency response, as well as with other specialist authorities, has intensified considerably and steadily improved since 2018. The KMBD provides expert advice on, as well asthe recovery and storage of found ammunition, ina timely and proportionate manner. The KMBD's recommended safety distances are selected ona case-by-case basis based on existing knowledge of former military land use and ammunition use, as well asthe risk situation ofthe vegetation fire, andon the basis ofthe relevant regulations. The cooperative interaction ofthe KMBD and the authorities involved in vegetation fires contributed tothe success ofthe operation, while observing the principle of proportionality and the safety of emergency personnel. In individual cases, the KMBD accompanied or initiated road surveys and enabled emergency personnel to This ledto faster operational success. 3.4.1. Early involvement ofthe KMBD specialist advisory service with the intended mission objectives, so that delays inthe situation assessment and ultimately inthe support services hadto be accepted. The advice and support ofthe KMBD ensures an efficient, butat the same time safe In retrospect, almost all large forest fires inthe intensive forest fire years since 2018 affected areas suspected of containing explosive ordnance. The state of Brandenburg cannot be implemented inthe short term. This remains a task for generations. Direct firefighting in areas suspected of containing explosive ordnance is difficult dueto the safety distances that must be maintained. When there isa latent risk of heat-based explosive ordnance being deployed, both direct ground-based and airborne measures are limited. The explosive effect is assumed tobe three-dimensional, so that airborne support for containing fire areas is also subject to corresponding safety regulations. Airborne measures donot usually extinguish a forest fire, but merely serve asa technical and tactical supplement to ground-based measures. Follow-up extinguishing operations by rotary-wing aircraft are considered tobe less economical overall, in addition tothe aforementioned safety aspects. In addition tothe fire regime expected inthe future, this represents oneof the greatest challenges ofthe coming years and decades. A comprehensive freedom from explosive ordnance canbe 3.4. Explosive ordnance (suspected) Firefighting on vegetation areas represents an important basis for decision-making and implementation, which should be used as early as possible. The operational commands regularly made useof the KMBD's expert advice inthe case of vegetation fires on areas suspected of containing explosive ordnance. The KMBD's request was Not always promptly, but sometimes with a delay without an adequate description of capabilities. The KMBD has not yet introduced anon-call system for vegetation fire incidents, so that only through internal coordination (even outside of normal business hours) could available and authorized personnel be dispatched ata later time, while ensuring the statutory primary mission. In some cases, the requested advisory orders from the operational command could notbe implemented dueto the KMBD's human and technical resources, or could only be implemented through a statewide concentration of personnel atthe scene. Furthermore, arriving KMBD personnel were not regularly provided with a technical briefing.
3.4.2. Data exchange of suspected explosive ordnance sites Proposed Solution 1: Local fire departments must be provided with easy access to current map and data services, at least within their areas of responsibility. Even though the availability and exchange of updated explosive ordnance maps canbe organizationally challenging, alternative sources of information must be identified. One possibility could bethe LGB datasets via the currently developed Geodata infrastructure for authorities and organizations with security tasks (GDI-BOSBB) Suitable data sets canbe imported into the situation display module of CommandX The LFB maintains current, information-based data sets on suspected explosive ordnance sites into the forest fire protection maps and has made them available viaa restricted-access link since 2022. Nevertheless, the local use and storage of this data is very heterogeneous. (EUROCOMMAND) and made available only to authorized users. Dynamic maps (regular evaluation of entries and exits) of suspected explosive ordnance areas are available tothe local fire brigade units (first arriving units at There is also the possibility of simplifying the update service. The KMBD and the LFB should be involved in this process. Proposed solution 2: Intensifying cooperation between the Saxon and Brandenburg KMBD and the Brandenburg fire departments inthe border region is desirable. Individual measures should be developed ina goal-oriented manner among the parties involved. a vegetation fire) isnot available across the board inall local authorities. This complicates the initial assessment ofthe risk tothe individual and the necessary initial measures. Onthe one hand, supra-local and even local authorities sometimes fail to forward the maps and data sets provided bythe KMBD tothe local fire departments. Onthe other hand, the temporarily valid map contents must be treated as sensitive data sets that cannot be made publicly available. 3.4.3. Efficient, safe tactics/special techniques During two extensive vegetation fires on areas contaminated with explosive ordnance near the Saxon- Brandenburg state border (Verbandsgemeinde Liebenwerda), Brandenburg emergency services were able to access maps from the Brandenburg KMBD. Maps ofthe Saxon explosive ordnance areas across the state border were only available Direct firefighting on areas suspected of containing explosive ordnance is difficult dueto the safety distances that must be maintained. Inthe case ofa latent risk of heat-induced explosive ordnance being deployed, both direct ground-based and air-based measures are required. Proposed solution: The KMBD should examine whether a seasonal on-call system for vegetation fires canbe established (if necessary, depending onthe forest fire danger level; see3.1.2KKM Liaison Personnel). The resulting reduction in dispatch times is necessary for the earliest possible consultation and support in order to assess further needs. To this end, the operations management must ensure regular and qualified involvement ofthe KMBD, for example, through checklists. available with a very long delay.
27 https://www.czdefence.com/article/czs-15-triton-introducing-new-reinforced-czech-water-tenders Complementing the concept, manned, armored reconnaissance and firefighting vehicles (configured forwarders26 with fire water tanks and monitors, tank firefighting vehicles27) could be considered for controlling and supplying the unmanned equipment. The use of unmanned hose-connected tracked chassis should be critically examined dueto their limited maneuverability and the need fora stable water supply. The KMBD should be included inthe evaluation process dueto its technical expertise. Ifthe procurement vote is positive, the establishment ofa state-owned special unit atthe LSTE and/orthe KMBD should be evaluated. It should be examined whether the technology tobe procured can also be incorporated into the fire protection concept ofthe KMBD's ammunition dismantling facility in Kummersdorf-Gut. The states, as well as local and supra-local authorities bordering the states, should be mutually informed about the capabilities of their neighboring units. For the state of Brandenburg, the publication ofa brochure is planned within the framework ofthe recently amended Disaster Management Ordinance with the respective service-specific administrative regulations. This brochure could also be distributed to neighboring federal states. If necessary, the state fire brigade associations could assist with further distribution. Publicity events Proposed solution: Technological alternatives to direct firefighting onUXO-contaminated areas must be examined. To rule out personal injury, the evaluation should focus particularly on unmanned systems. In addition to remotely operated tracked chassis24 (possibly with extinguishing water tanks for firefighting with extinguishing water and mulcher attachments for wound stripping), the operational tactical values of firefighting drone swarms25 (current research project inthe state of Brandenburg) must be investigated. Furthermore, the procurement of manned, armored vehicles with additional configurations (extinguishing water tanks, attachments, etc.) for reconnaissance and firefighting purposes must be assessed. Such systems canbe used to reduce the risk of personal injury. contribute and current procedures (cost-intensive and risky rotorcraft use) for extinguishing effectiveness directly atthe source ofthe fire and for rapid operational success limited. The explosion effect is assumed tobe three-dimensional, so that airborne support for fire containment is also subject to appropriate safety regulations. Airborne measures donot usually extinguish a forest fire, but rather serve merely asa technical-tactical supplement to ground-based measures. In addition tothe aforementioned safety aspects, follow-up extinguishing operations by rotary-wing aircraft are considered less economical overall. 25 https://www.naturetec.flights/ 26 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z2vfU2zM-p024 https://dok-ing.hr/defence-security/ Events such asthe planned FIREmobil trade fair in Welzow or FLORIAN in Dresden could represent suitable additions to expand knowledge. Each federal state has structured and developed special capabilities, including vegetation firefighting, within the framework of disaster control. The knowledge ofthe capabilities ofthe respective disaster control units ofa neighboring federal state is currently still limited; the establishment ofthe GeKoB will bring about improvements in this area.
Since 2019, the LSTE has been offering a special seminar on vegetation fire fighting, which is continuously being developed in order to raise the necessary awareness inthe Within the framework ofthe training concept, the LSTE is actively involved inthe sub-working group Training/Tactics (UAG) within the open-country working group National Forest fire protection and provides input, supported byUAG members, fora nationwide standardized training and teaching approach inthe newly evaluated field of vegetation firefighting. Working cooperatively, the UAG evaluates tactical alternatives for implementation in local regions. The stated goal of this UAGis the development of nationwide curricula (supplements) and recommendations for existing and newly developed specialized training courses. local fire brigades andto train multipliers for basic training on site. In addition, the LSTE offered a training program inair coordination for the first time in 2020. The aim ofthe training isto train managers of public fire brigades and other Proposed solution: Ifthe implementation progress ofthe UAG does not match the LSTE Disaster relief organizations involved in providing expert advice and management of airborne hazard/damage prevention measures (particularly inthe case of vegetation fires) the desired dynamics, the LSTE aims to achieve this, probably inthe training year Inthe 2022 training year, a further, more advanced course was offered. This course already incorporated insights and impressions from the extensive useof aircraft 2024 tobe able to offer special training courses. The focus will beon the courses "District Instructor for Vegetation Fires" and "Leading in Vegetation Fire Operations." The District Instructor Course is intended to establish basic training atthe local and supra-local level, which will contribute to increased risk and safety awareness and The course is intended to convey the handling of situation-adapted, technical-tactical implementation variants. The handling of centrally managed firefighting technology (see3.6 during this year's forest fire season, which will be carried outin a joint evaluation event ata direct working level with the previously deployed flying BOS (Federal Police, Police ofthe State of Brandenburg, Bundeswehr) and drone experts inthe State of Brandenburg. Central State Procurement and Technology). The training objective ofthe leadership course isto acquire skills adapted tothe leadership levels in selecting tactical variants. In addition, the leaders must be sensitized tothe situation assessment of these dynamic operational situations and also incorporate extensive weather influences into the decision-making process. Vegetation fires pose particular challenges dueto their dynamic nature and progressive spread. However, firefighters have sofar been trained and conditioned primarily for static situations (e.g., building fires, traffic accidents). Recent events have demonstrated the need fora further intensified training campaign for vegetation firefighting in order to convey, onthe one hand, safer procedures and, onthe other hand, efficient response (tactical toolbox for vegetation fires). Atthe same time, tactics from abroad must also be considered in relation to local migration efforts. 3.5. Training/Tactics 3.5.1. Development of necessary training products (context: vegetation fires)
28implemented by @fire Special technology must be understood and used by managers ina way that is appropriate tothe circumstances Elster) an open area of approximately 15 hectares was created to prevent fire from spreading toA large, contiguous pine forest was burned ina controlled manner to reduce the fire load. Given the predicted, prolonged drought periods and the resulting reduction in firefighting water availability, tactical pre-fire operations may represent a future option. canbe. Proposed solution: Since tactical fire deployment currently represents a secondary technical- tactical option, centrally available LSTE employees should initially be qualified for this application. Atthe same time, however, itcan be assumed that this option will assume greater importance bythe endof this decade. However, this option requires a lengthy development of skills and experience, which can currently be achieved primarily in southern European countries with forest fire experience. In preparation for the expected increase in forest fire risk, the qualification process should begin promptly. Meanwhile, an accreditation procedure for the recognition and qualification standardization of such skills must be developed inthe Federal Republic of Germany. Itis important to prevent emergency personnel from being qualified by companies and organizations without a3.5.2. Tactical fire Comparability and minimum standardization are essential. Dueto the inferior training, supposedly qualified personnel could underestimate the complex application of tactics and cause serious dangers. Tactical fire operations are also a common option for targeted, preventative fuel reduction. Given the extreme fire behavior observed during this forest fire season (e.g., Treuenbrietzen, Beelitz, and two fires inthe Liebenwerda municipality), in addition tothe technical-tactical options already known and established in Germany, previously unknown options in these latitudes must be evaluated for implementation inthe state of Brandenburg. This includes, in particular, tactical fire deployment asa controlled burning to evaluate constructively and impartially with the relevant ministry and the State Forestry Authority. substance reduction during an extensive vegetation fire to directly prevent the spread inthe main direction of fire propagation orto secure defined areas. The effectiveness of this option is regularly demonstrated, particularly in European and Anglo- American countries. Even ifnot every vegetation area in Brandenburg is suitable for While tactical fire control (especially controlled burnout and tactical pre-fire control) is suitable, this expands the options for action, particularly in weedy, sparse pine forests. During the forest fire inthe town of Beelitz, tactical pre-fire control represented the last and most successful option28 to prevent the fire from spreading to settlement structures. Atthe same time, this measure proved tobe very efficient inthe useof resources, taking into account the length ofthe fire front area. decision-making. The technical-tactical operational values of centrally procured Forest fire inthe Verbandsgemeinde Liebenwerda (local municipality of Falkenberg/
31insbesondere NWCG (National Wildfire Coordinating Group) der USA 29 units in firefighting and rescue operations 30Technical - medical rescue after traffic accidents of necessary course products) could be provided by their qualified members For vegetation firefighting, universal to specialized fire engines with crews of three to nine people are currently used asone of several units. Tank fire engines for forest fires (e.g., TLF-WBB) in particular offer space for three people. The presentation ofa rapid fire attack with pressure hoses over larger 3.5.4. Participation of specialized non-profit organizations high fire intensity, changing wind direction/fire progression). In addition, the establishment ofa central state management unit for vegetation fire prevention Distances from the vehicle location (ÿ100 m) are difficult to achieve with this extended squad. For this purpose, additional vehicles with a squadron or group strength (some with The fire behavior during this forest fire season has shown that existing resources can quickly reach their limits if current tactics are maintained. The dynamics ofthe local fires were comparable to extreme vegetation fires in southern Europe and the Anglo-American region. There are currently only afew specialists in Germany who can draw on such experience. Some road chassis) until at least one group equivalent value (0/1/8/9) is established. Non-profit organizations have already gained extensive experience in vegetation fire fighting over the past decade and have specialized through training according to foreign standards31 and internships in Europe and the USA. Particularly in Brandenburg A standardized task allocation for this vehicle composition and type of operation takes place the non-profit organizations @fire - International Disaster Relief Germany eVand the Waldbrandteam eV have concentrated extensive expertise in this complex. For classic, static fire operations and traffic accidents, standards are set in accordance with Fire Service Regulation 329or the vfdb Guideline 06/0130 For dynamically spreading wildfires, comparable conventions are currently lacking, which would facilitate the actions ofthe crews and the responsible commander fora regular vegetation fire and increase the safety ofthe emergency services. These organizations have already demonstrated their capabilities this forest fire season through several deployments to large forest fires. Knowledge transfer with Brandenburg emergency services on efficient firefighting has already taken place during the deployment. Proposed solution: For the state of Brandenburg, standards of action should be established for units consisting ofone or more vehicles. These regulations, which apply equally to training, exercises, and operations, should also include basic specifications for predefined attack and retreat routes, safety zones, and secure posts in order to Proposed solution: Non-profit organizations should be integrated into the central vegetation firefighting training and specialized vegetation fire response, depending on their capacity and willingness to cooperate. Selected training content for the LSTE courses tobe developed (see3.5.1 Development 3.5.3. Development of tactical action standards the protection ofthe emergency services atall times and especially inthe event of changes inthe situation (areas with
Tactical fire support, air coordination, and specialized guidance during post-fire operations are part of this unit's capability portfolio. However, the medium- to long-term capabilities of these organizations must also be regularly evaluated, as members are organized from throughout Germany and large-scale simultaneous operations are expected inthe future. Furthermore, based onthe experience gained in 2022, itis evident that the proportion of predominantly volunteer officials inthe specialist management services ofthe lower civil protection authorities appears tobe stagnating or even declining slightly. In order to ensure analog redundancy inthe event ofa complete failure of digital situation display and documentation options, itis desirable touse them as uniformly as possible. 3.5.5. Training opportunities for staff work and operational section management This maybe dueto the fact that many ofthe volunteer leaders, who are primarily involved in public fire services, already perform technical and administrative work and may find the dual functions resulting from membership inthe specialist management services a burden. In addition, the lower The training of functionaries atthe various management levels, which develop from the growing management organization, is solid and complies with the requirements of Fire Service Regulation 2 (Training of Volunteer Fire Departments), which has been introduced as mandatory inthe state of Brandenburg. Nevertheless, individual deficiencies within the staff line organization were evident inthe predominantly volunteer positions during the major forest fire incidents. In addition to routine and consolidated functional performance ina technical operations command or within a command staff, the analysis must also focus onthe functions ofa section management asan intermediate authority within the management organization. The managers must develop a sensitizing understanding of their role for major disasters and Disaster management authorities should generally be required to offer regular training opportunities within their organizational structures in order to consolidate procedures and functional performance through exercises and training. The LSTE has already overcome this deficit after the Proposed solution: The LSTE specialist publication (including templates) should be further integrated into training and continuing education programs and promoted tothe respective task forces. In addition tothe pure training courses, the LSTE should also develop continuing education programs for specific functions inthe staff departments and subordinate command units. 32 https://lste.brandenburg.de/lste/de/service/fachinformationen/fuehrungsunterstuetzung/#) The forest fire years 2018 and 2019 were identified anda specialist publication32 was published in spring 2021 to improve the interpretation of operational command with command units at command levels Band Cin accordance with Fire Service Regulation 100. Provided and adaptable templates for better and clearer task performance (e.g. supply notification, written command scheme) within the respective command organization complete the reading. Since the The publication is experiencing increasing popularity. However, itis clear that The organizational connection could be made atthe LSTE. In addition to fire analysis, fire perimeter mapping, that these templates are not yet being used across the board.
The integration of adapted, functionally appropriate training content for the useof the CommandX management software must be considered. Increased staff training release non-police fleet mapping for transfer and use in their structures. The ASBB has provided the neighbouring federal states with call groups from Brandenburg, bythe LSTE and the BABZ (formerly AKNZ) can help the responsible authorities and the districts to better handle operational situations. The cross-state (staff framework) exercises ofthe operational commands and the designation of joint locations Neighbouring federal states are free to program these call groups on their terminals. Currently, there isno clear overview inthe state of Brandenburg asto which neighbouring federal state has programmed the released call groups from the state of Brandenburg into its specific for both operational commands in anticipation of operational scenarios should be promoted. Fleetmapping has taken over. In order to determine the technical possibilities and troubleshooting inthe case ofuse, such an overview can increase the efficiency ofthe technical The intermediate or preliminary stage ofthe bilateral exchange of liaison officers (with increasing personnel numbers) will be implemented and planned in advance. The creation ofa training course "District Instructor in Vegetation Fire Fighting" atthe LSTE, involving @Fire and other specialists (SKV, etc.), is also planned. This can contribute to communication between task forces along a national border ina cross- border emergency situation. Furthermore, the ASBB already enables event-specific group combining for specific emergency scenarios. In addition, dynamic call group assignment canbe implemented in individual cases. These technical options are available nationwide and can be tailored to tactical requirements. Proposed solution: The ASBB and the LSTE should provide further training materials for individual self-study. This includes freely available tutorials that explain handling and simple troubleshooting through short videos. For example, tactical call groups for operational-tactical cooperation (TBZ call groups) or special cooperation (ZA call groups) could be reserved or preconfigured for cross-border operational situations. This need is discussed with the affected 3.5.6. Handling digital radio Voice and data services via BOS digital radio are one ofthe most important means of communication for police and non-police emergency response agencies. Digital radio terminals are available nationwide in vehicles and command centers. The technical communications organization canbe adapted tothe command organization atthe scene ofthe incident, from the initial local deployment phase tothe potential escalation into a major incident/disaster. For this purpose, tactical requirements ofthe BOS digital radio users canbe presented tothe authorized agencies prior toa thorough operational preparation. The Authorized Digital Radio Agency (ASBB) is available tothe local These technical optimizations allow for regional, mission-specific preparations (e.g. switching call groups when alerting toand supra-local authorities inthe state of Brandenburg asa reliable partner. In particular, the radio technology requirements along state borders require in order to develop the role competencies ofthe respective managers more strongly. intensive, equal coordination with the respective authorities inthe neighboring federal state.
Proposed solution: For the orderly coordination and placement of internships and training positions abroad, a central coordination office should be established atthe federal level (e.g., atthe BBKor the BABZ), butat least inthe state of Brandenburg, possibly atthe Forest Fire Competence Center. This office canbe a Specifically, the following measures canbe implemented inthe short term: - In individual cases, the ASBB can compensate for limited radio coverage Communication planners atthe district headquarters and operations management, Establish a network of authorities and institutions with foreign BOS, serve to bundle requests and ensure a synergistic and even distribution of places. (cid:127) Revision of planning documents (including cross-border ones) (hazard prevention planning, communications plan). This includes taking into account the prepared radio communication measures, such as: an increase in transmission power canbe requested, Atthe same time, this office relieves the relevant foreign authorities of single and multiple inquiries. - to project the “ZA Group” (Cross-border Digital Radio Group) onto the terminal devices - Mobile TETRA base stations (mBS) canbe deployed to improve local radio coverage if suitable locations are available. A federal satellite-based mBSis stationed inBB and can be deployed if available. Additional state-owned systems are located inthe program and have them released bythe ASBB, Procurement. 3.5.7 Participation in European knowledge transfer - Involvement ofthe ASBB inthe communication planning ofthe districts, - Approval and designation of “TBZ groups” (tactical-operational cooperation groups) bythe ASBB and subsequent integration into the communication plan, A continuous transfer of knowledge/exchange of experts with foreign specialists and special units can make it easier for the State of Brandenburg to avoid mistakes inthe implementation/introduction ofnew measures orto use already developed, efficient solutions - In-depth training ofthe fire brigade inthe operation of radio technology, tobe evaluated in accordance with the best practice principle for local challenges. Southern European countries have been able to accumulate a wealth of experience in combating vegetation fires with extreme fire behavior for decades. These conclusions must be transferred proportionately to Germany, and especially tothe state of Brandenburg, in order to take precautions for the expected next generation of vegetation fires (fires with ever-increasing intensity and increasing risk potential for the population, settlements, and infrastructure) inthe North German Plain. deployment sites near the border), which should be taken into account in coordinated special plans. - In-depth training atthe state fire brigade schools for staff members and
33for thermal body protection during indoor firefighting (e.g. in apartment fires) PPE, so that the probability of injuries and physical overload The central procurement of fire service and disaster protection equipment bythe state of Brandenburg has proven successful over the past decades. This has enabled the vehicle fleets ofthe fire and disaster protection agencies tobe significantly rejuvenated and supplemented with modern equipment that reflects the state ofthe art and meets the required capabilities. A further significant capability enhancement was achieved through the procurement of five high- performance conveyor systems (HFS), The state of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern also participated with a further 11 vehicles. Some ofthe vehicles delivered in 2022 have already achieved their high is increasing. The Brandenburg Fire Service Accident Insurance Fund also warns against this fact. Through centralized tenders combined with the extensive allocation of funding, the special risks of vegetation fires inthe state of Brandenburg were taken into account. 56 tank fire engines (TLF20/50, TLF 5000, and TLF-W Type Brandenburg (TLF-WBB), specially equipped for forest fire operations, have been centrally procured since 2008. consisting ofa roll-off container onan all-terrain swap body anda logistics vehicle. These systems enable large-volume water pumping for both fire and flood operations. The necessity of maintaining and the performance of these systems was demonstrated in 2022, among other things, during the major forest fire. Proposed solution: The local authorities should check whether the emergency services Firefighting vehicle types for municipal fire protection also come from procurement measures ofthe state of Brandenburg, which since 2020 have also been equipped with special loading kits for vegetation fire fighting to further increase their capabilities. inthe Lieberoser Heide. They were able to pump upto 3,000l/minof fire-fighting water from a lake, over Atthe initiative ofthe LSTE, the DIN Firefighting Vehicle Standards Committee developed a uniform several kilometers are made available for firefighting. 3.6.1 Personal protective equipment Specification of minimum standards for tank firefighting vehicles for vegetation fire fighting which, since October 2022, asDIN/TS 14530-29, has been demonstrating the technical-tactical operational value The personal protective equipment (PPE) provided bythe municipal authorities is often considered unsuitable bythe emergency services for fighting vegetation fires. of such vehicles inthe Federal Republic of Germany andis intended to serve asa starting point for further technical developments. described. Often, emergency personnel are only equipped with clothing for indoor firefighting. The outfit for outdoor firefighting isnot available to many emergency personnel. Asa result, emergency personnel donot wear full or thermally insulating clothing during vegetation firefighting dueto the physical strain. 3.6. Central State Procurement and Technology The forest fire events since 2018 provided an opportunity to further develop the design and equipment ofthe special tank fire engines for vegetation fire fighting andto initiate a centrally funded large-scale procurement of35 tank fire engines TLF-WBB, in which
34Clothing should be suitable for vegetation fires, but also for technical assistance 35Changing a contaminated PPE set while using the second setIn addition, circular sprinklers canbe used to achieve long-term moistening ofthe forest floor anda beneficial increase inthe humidity level under the canopy. The equipment sets should have a coverage range of500 mand be supplemented by additional fittings (distributors, shut- off valves). Unmanned operation ensures gentle and safe personnel deployment. to prevent the spread of contamination andto improve site hygiene35 . Proposed Solution 2: Local fire protection agencies should evaluate their equipment and resources for effective vegetation firefighting and, if necessary, supplement them with the following recommendations. The equipment sets can also be used for the district vegetation fire training program that is currently being developed (see3.5 Training/Tactics). be included inthe central state funding. 3.6.2. Central State Procurement (cid:127) Equipment setD-Storz fittings: The application rates that canbe displayed are sufficient for control thresholds ofup to2 m diagonal flame length for direct fire fighting. The perceived extreme fire behavior ofthe forest fires should be understood asa reason to evaluate the technical-tactical approach. Dangerous situations (e.g. The fittings (pressure hoses, distributors, jet pipes) should be configured for two groups Even with careful tactical selection, sudden, local changes in wind direction cannot be completely avoided. The self-protection capabilities of units must be tested through appropriate technical vehicle and superstructure configuration upgrades, and, if necessary, For transport over rough terrain, transport backpacks/cargo carriers should be used. (cid:127) Equipment set hand tools/fire backpacks: attack tools (fire beater, to evaluate further vehicle types for inclusion inthe procurement portfolio. Selected equipment additions for existing vehicle and logistics components can adequately expand both the special hazard prevention measures for vegetation fires and the supply concepts. Firefighting tools (e.g., fire backpacks, etc.) are only suitable for direct firefighting in moderate fire intensities (waist-high flames). Hook and digging tools, onthe other hand, are suitable for creating control lines/wound strips to defend unaffected areas. Solution 1: The special TLF-WBB areto be (cid:127) Circular sprinkler equipment set: Circular sprinklers are suitable for unmanned barrier positions along paths and skid trails, especially in areas contaminated with explosive ordnance. areto be equipped with operational clothing for outdoor firefighting.34In this respect, it should be examined whether, inthe future, appropriate clothing canbe offered at economical prices through framework contracts with the department store ofthe Central Service ofthe Brandenburg Police. The addition ofa possible additional setof PPE also contributes evaluate and, if necessary, further develop. Other special vehicle types with a special tactical operational value for major incidents and disasters (e.g. LF-KatS) should
Solution 1: For targeted planning availability and better overview- Marking material and windsocks. The materials should be sufficient foran area ofat least 200mx 100m (equivalent totwo landing areas fora CH-53, if necessary Mobile toilets, which are also procured to meet human needs, are delivered promptly to these (cid:127) Hygiene equipment kit: Vegetation fires often occur far from settlements without adequate infrastructure. Roll containers canbe setup at catering and logistics points for rough cleaning of contaminated skin. landing areas fora CH-47F). In addition, special PPE (special points. Depending onthe staff size ofa BSE, six toilets, two urinals, and two washbasins should be installed (see user key according toASR 4.1). Helmets with communication ports, eye protection, etc.) are required. When assembling this equipment, technical coordination with the FUK BBand theBG Verkehr (Traffic Safety and Health Association) must be ensured. 3.6.3 Involvement of agricultural enterprises (cid:127) Accommodation equipment kit: For self-sufficient ad-hoc accommodation of personnel ofthe disaster control units (here: BSE, leadership, ICT), accommodation materials should be Agricultural businesses and contractors provide valuable and appreciated support in containing vegetation fires. This isdue not least tothe agricultural and forestry value creation threatened by fires. Water transport and soil cultivation technology can initiate rapid and comprehensive measures. Inthe event of large forest fires, numerous offers of assistance from agriculture reach the responsible emergency response agencies. Dueto priority decision-making and organizational needs, as well asthe nature ofthe individual requests, a coordinated response tothe offers could notbe provided in every case. In addition, there were isolated cases of uncertainty regarding possible financial demands that were not communicated during the requests, which remained after the end ofthe operation. Atthe same time, harvesting operations on agricultural land area potential cause of fire. Rotating machine parts and foreign objects can represent ignition sources indry grain fields. Incipient fires can spread if safety measures are inadequate. (sleeping bags, folding beds, hygiene products, towels, ...) forat least 100 people. The set should at least be sufficient for accommodation in structural Facilities (gymnasiums, multi-purpose halls, etc.) canbe configured. If necessary, aand lead tothe endangerment of agricultural machinery and the loss of crops. Rapid fire escalation to adjacent forest and settlement areas must beThe addition of tents, heating, power supply and lighting should be evaluated. should be considered inthe risk analysis. Dueto the wind-driven nature ofthe open terrain, the fire front's travel speeds are generally assumed tobe very high. (cid:127) Helicopter security equipment kit: Special equipment and PPE are required to secure and operate temporary outstations during airborne support operations. Security equipment includes, among other things, barrier/ In addition toa multi-day (at least 48-hour) deployment of disaster control units inthe event of vegetation fires, these equipment sets could also be used for Brandenburg relief contingents in more remote operational areas.
Using specialized technology, local emergency response authorities can compile the information inan online database prior toan incident. Voluntary registration allows for transparent selection and orderly integration by decision-making bodies, regionally and based on capabilities. Agricultural interest groups (Brandenburg State Farmers' Association) and fire service organizations (Brandenburg State Fire Service Association) could be involved in disseminating the concept or inspiring its adoption. One example isthe "Red Farmer" concept ofthe KFV Main-Spessart eV36 . represent an important organisational support documentation of measures and available special funds and thus complement a preparation level that goes beyond the local level Disaster management authorities support this process through uniform specifications (e.g., keyword-based force/resource approaches) as well as through the creation and updating of event-specific special plans, which should be synchronized with other specialist authorities (e.g., forestry authorities, mining authorities, explosive ordnance disposal services). The special plans represent Proposed solution 2: Farmers must be further sensitized to preventive measures during harvesting ondry grain fields. The "Regulatory Ordinance onthe Installation of Weed Strips on Agricultural Land atthe Edge of Forests" of February 23, 2021, provides a good basis for campaigns that canbe designed jointly with the interest groups ofall involved stakeholders (the Baden-Württemberg State Fire Brigade Association, the Baden-Württemberg State Farmers' Association, and the Baden- Württemberg Forest Owners' Association). Planning of operational resources within the framework of supra-regional fire protection. The quality level ofthe preparatory actions ofthe aforementioned responsible bodies varies within the state of Brandenburg. 3.7. Preparation for deployment Furthermore, retrospective conclusions beyond the collection of forest fire data are important for deriving appropriate and well-founded adaptation strategies for the prevention and response to vegetation fires inthe future. This must also include fires on agricultural and other open land areas.36The basic risk of forest fires inthe state of Brandenburg is regularly assessed as high to very high during the forest fire season. This basic assumption will change inthe coming years. 36 https://kfv-msp.de/redfarmer/ and decades, but will probably become even more pronounced. In this context, itis necessary for high-risk forest fire hotspots (e.g. poor or deteriorating firefighting water supply, settlement areas adjacent to forests, poorly developed road system, suspicion of explosive ordnance) at local and supra-local level. Legally required local operational plans must contain basic procedures for the deployment of forces and resources, assembly points and adaptable leadership and communication structures areto be defined together with the responsible forestry authority and are reflected inthe special deployment plans ofthe districts. The agricultural technology potential, such as water barrels, tractors If forest fire hotspots extend over the territory of several local authorities, homogeneous coordination must be achieved through inter-municipal cooperation.
Issue 09/2022 was published to create a standardization impulse for dynamic spreading situations, such as those tobe expected in vegetation fires under certain conditions. Even ifthe local alarm and dispatch regulations are individually implemented within the framework of municipal self-government, uniform and effective Recommendations for appropriate initial alerting bythe responsible authorities for supra-local fire protection and supra-local assistance in relation tothe respective local risk potentials are considered effective. Some local alarm and dispatch regulations for vegetation fire-specific operational keywords are considered a minimal approach, although the level of availability of suitable, alertable emergency resources inthe state of Brandenburg has increased significantly in recent decades. Proposed solution: To contain a dynamic vegetation fire, the following preliminary planning is recommended for each district. The required extinguishing water volumes via tank fire engines (TLF) should be planned in advance, depending on keywords and local needs. Asa first indication, at least 12,000 liters of water maybe appropriate for the initial alarm in peripheral areas. In addition, additional fire engines in squadron or group strength, as well asa command unit to establish a growing command organization, are necessary. 16 emergency personnel with 6,000 liters of extinguishing water (via TLF) for early intervention (usually 25 minutes after the fire is reported) ata priority fire flank appear appropriate. Additional personnel and resources must be considered for the second flank orfor the protection of settlement areas. Intermunicipal cooperation has been strengthened through central state procurement since was published bythe LSTE inthe trade journal BRANDSchutz/Deutsche Feuerwehrzeitung inthe 2007 provided a necessary impetus. Many local authorities have since harmonized their alarm and dispatch procedures to ensure appropriate emergency response. For vegetation fires, alarm and dispatch procedures are also coordinated between the relevant authorities, differentiated regionally. To ensure a future opportunity to limit the spread ofa vegetation fire with extreme fire behavior, even inthe initial phase, further developed minimum requirements foran adequate response should be recommended or defined. A discussion paper on critical vegetation fires 3.7.1. Alarm and deployment order/force-resource approach Ifthe local fire protection authority cannot manage the described functions and resources with its own resources, intermunicipal cooperation must be initiated to coordinate the alarm and dispatch regulations. The supra-local fire protection authority must provide guidance and assume a coordinating role while maintaining basic local protection. For highly urban landscapes without large forest areas, reduced approaches maybe sufficient. Qualified data sets on vegetation fires inthe state of Brandenburg are currently limited exclusively to fires that caused damage to forest areas. Fires in grain fields and other unpopulated open areas, however, are not included. centrally recorded. This reduces the retrospective, central significance of actual ecological 3.7.2 Analysis of vegetation fires and weather data The Working Group on Operational Keywords is currently revising the operational keyword catalogue ofthe Integrated Regional Control Centres.
and resources. Vegetation fires place far greater demands on emergency services than the annual forest fire statistics ofthe Brandenburg State Forestry Authority reflect. Grain field and other open land fires pose an equal risk, at least inthe summer months, since In particular, local winds, solar intensities and topography are taken into account in addition tothe relative Humidity, outside temperature and residual moisture in dead wood, litter and Preventive protective measures have sofar appeared tobe of little need. However, grain fields often border directly on residential properties with flammable building materials and can endanger entire residential areas inthe event ofa fire. Several near misses demonstrate The raw humus layer on site represents a significant assessment factor for determining operational priorities. In southern Europe, special units with expertise in forestry, meteorology, and hazard prevention have been established to exclusively produce spread forecasts for extreme vegetation fires in order to enable the precise deployment of forces and resources. also inthe state of Brandenburg (e.g. Wildgrube 2019 inEE, Prösen 2020 inEE, Lindenberg 2021 inLOS, Lossow 2021 + 2022 inFF, Zossen 2022 inTF) a perceptible, but currently Proposed solution: The statistical survey ata central location must cover the entire spectrum Unfounded risk for settlement areas inthe case of dynamic and fast-moving field fires. of vegetation fires and must notbe limited to forest fires. Itis expected that the field of fire analysis will not only become increasingly relevant forad hoc evaluation during an operation, but will also play akey role inthe collection of data sets for strategic adaptation (preventive and defensive vegetation fire measures) inan interdisciplinary context. 3.7.3. Specialized vegetation firefighting units The speed of movement and the fire load-controlled fire intensity, including the prevailing weather parameters (humidity, wind speed, and temperature), of field fires also result in special safety regulations for emergency responders. However, general preventive measures can only be drawn ina balanced and transparent manner inthe interest ofall affected parties (emergency responders, farmers, landowners) if objective data and fire progression analyses are available for evaluation. Furthermore, fire progression analyses, especially inthe case of forest fires, canbe used to derive general patterns of spread and behavior for similar future situations. An investigative, qualified analysis of forest fire progressions is currently underway. The extreme vegetation fires ofthe 2022 season have demonstrated that firefighting requires specialized expertise in situation assessment and technical-tactical measures. This expertise, which needs tobe further developed, leads to special skills (At least) notin an interdisciplinary manner. From these scientifically oriented follow-up analyses, important conclusions canbe drawn for preventive, as well as defensive, tactical measures. In particular, the situational conditions on site, such asthe vegetation condition, profile incisions, and local weather and wind data, are important data sources for constructive analysis. economic and ecological damages and risks as well asthe strain on forces Location-specific and precise weather data will play an even more crucial role than before inthe future assessment and analysis of fire behavior andin the selection of tactics.
In such situations, tactical defensive measures will in future be less focused onthe @fire International Disaster Relief Germany eVor Forest Fire Team eVin the Proposed solution: With the expected further increase in extreme vegetation fires, itcan be assumed inthe medium term that this non-governmental organization (NGO) expertise will not always be available ona regular basis. Equivalent alternatives must be developed for these situations. These include the intermunicipal, contractual merger of interested emergency services into specialized units orthe establishment of special units atthe level ofthe endangered districts. 3.8. Preventive forest fire protection To specialize and consolidate fire and disaster protection structures. Asa The defensive measures for forest fires are essentially a short-term treatment of symptoms. The causes of fire initiation and progression, however, are very complex and multiple. Although the progression ofa vegetation fire canbe influenced by silvicultural and other preventive measures, theA positive model example from the Oberhavel district shows that inter-municipal cooperation can efficiently facilitate the transfer of international knowledge and practical skills. The causes of fire outbreaks are difficult to model. The majority of forest fires are caused by negligent or intentional anthropological triggers. While vegetation fires far from settlement structures primarily affect agricultural and forestry areas, The fire departments ofthe towns of Liebenwalde and Zehdenick established an intermunicipal vegetation firefighting unit (SKV - Specialized Vegetation Fire Forces). and cause ecological damage, the risk situation of fire vegetation area near settlement areas is significantly larger. This isand conduct harmonized training events and procurement projects to supplement the unit's technical capabilities. Meanwhile, the city of Templin (UM) has also joined this connected toa specialized unit. particularly dueto site-specific development factors such as highly flammable The aforementioned organizations and units were represented in some ofthe Vegetation, its vertical and horizontal density, deadwood components, and the actual distance from settlements to forest areas. Inthe presence of unfavorable weather and drought factors that cannot be influenced atthe same time, fire events canno longer be controlled with conventional means of hazard prevention, even ifthe fire load is sufficient. which cannot be covered by every local fire department inthe state of Brandenburg. Overburdening these local units must be avoided given the diverse range of operational scenarios. Local fire departments areto be viewed as general intervention units within the framework of general basic protection. The specific capability development for fighting and containing large forest fires that are difficult to control requires a pooling of personnel and material resources to complement local fire department structures. Given the lengthy process of acquiring skills and experience, it seems sensible to establish units analogous tonon-profit organizations such asThe company has been successfully deployed in complex forest fire incidents (Beelitz, Bad Liebenwerda/Mühlberg, Falkenberg). This was due not least toits special expertise in tactical firefighting operations as well asin structured and qualified follow-up firefighting operations.
37Wood resulting from storm damage, drought and/or pest infestation 38MLUK: Recommendations for managing wildfire areas, December 2022 According to long-term forecast trends, an intensification of extreme fire behavior must be assumed, making preventive measures around settlements and infrastructure even more important than they already are. Furthermore, the system of forest fire protection strips and fire lanes isan important preventive measure for suppressing fire propagation along road and rail infrastructure. Some fire lane systems have not been maintained in recent years. and lost their effectiveness. The establishment of forest fire protection strips and fire protection belts should be encouraged again, particularly along federal and state roads and some railway lines. 3.8.1. Fire load management Grass growth in forest areas below a light canopy closure level can promote the spread of fire and should therefore be avoided. The discussion about deadwood asa fire load in forests is currently controversial. Calamity wood37 can indeed pose a major challenge for emergency responders during an extensive vegetation fire. Even deadwood in contact with the ground, which dries out during a long drought period, can lead to fire intensities with above-average heat release rates. Firefighters perceived the spread and propagation speeds inthe 2022 forest fire season as very high dueto the dry deadwood. Proposed solution: To protect forest edges along settlement areas and forest paths asIf forest damage and tree mortality dueto multiple factors continue, the fire load from dry deadwood must be expected to continue to increase. Deadwood plays an important ecological role inthe forest ecosystem, particularly inthe silvicultural conversion process from fire-prone coniferous forests to more climate- and fire-resistant mixed forests. Preserving deadwood on burned areas serves to protect Tobe able touse these defensive lines, a compromise solution could bethe removal (chop) of deadwood and low branches tothe left and right of forest paths (50m each). A parceling of forest areas to minimize fire spread is proposed. Inthe long term, the most sustainable goal isto convert forests to mixed forests along settlement areas adjacent to forests. Furthermore, the inner and outer edges of forests areto beand promoting forest regeneration, e.g. through shading, buffering of temperature extremes, wind protection and water retention, maintaining the highest possible nutrient stocks and promoting biodiversity. Compromises must be found here. Decisions regarding the handling of deadwood, particularly those caused by fire, must therefore be made ona small scale and take into account the proximity to paths, settlements and other To establish a protective function and promote its development. Infrastructures inthe sense of preventive fire protection. On forest paths that are the actual liquidation ofthe fire, but rather onthe defense ofthe settlement areas Clearing deadwood isa top priority for forest fire and disaster protection. The permanent accessibility of these roads must be ensured. The brochure "Recommendations for Managing Forest Fire Areas" provides further clear recommendations for dealing with deadwood. These recommendations are aimed atall forest owners and serve asa basis for forestry experts to advise, monitor, and implement measures.
fire operation). Proposed solution: Planning authorities should already consider the risks of vegetation fires inthe future during the development planning phase. Wildland-Urban Interface Management not only focuses on reducing fire loads, but also aims to plant alternative, more fire-resistant tree species (creating forest fire barriers). Especially when designating new building areas within the framework of development planning, distances and protective measures must already be taken into account. The design specifications for construction works tobe erected inthe immediate vicinity of vegetation areas must take into account the latent risk of spreading 3.8.2. Spatial planning ofa vegetation fire on these very structures. Furthermore, the storage of combustible materials and the planting of highly flammable trees and shrubs inthe immediate vicinity of buildings should be prohibited in individual cases. Fire bridges and fuel clusters (e.g., gutters filled with needle litter, roofing felt) on properties provide favorable conditions for fire spread to building structures. The transition zones between potentially fire-prone vegetation areas (even seasonally) and settlement areas must be subject to special consideration. This so-called wildland-urban interface management will particularly affect settlements (forest settlements, weekend cottage settlements, campsites) that are directly adjacent toor surrounded by forests. This management may also include 3.9 Cross-border cooperation Agricultural areas should be included, asa fire outbreak (harvest-ready grain fields with low residual moisture) on these open areas is expected to spread rapidly. Grain field fires with dangerous spread potential inthe 2022 season support this assumption (e.g., the city of Zossen, the Verbandsgemeinde Liebenwerda/ Inthe initial phases oftwo large forest fires involving vegetation fires inthe area ofthe Saxon-Brandenburg state border (Verbandsgemeinde Liebenwerda), the direct and indirect communication coordination processes were assessed as being in need of further optimization. Fichtenberg municipality/border to Saxony). The urban development framework conditions are adapted tothe risks arising from vegetation fires near settlement areas Dueto the expected increase in extreme fires resulting from multiple, location-dependent influencing factors, sensitive considerations must be prioritized inthe future designation of building sites and the approval of construction projects in these areas, which excludes any danger to buildings and users orat least reduces itto an acceptable level. For existing structures that are surrounded byor border on forest areas, authorities must be able to implement subsequent risk-minimizing measures. Itis important to increase the protection of citizens in these settlement areas andto implement special, Furthermore, in suitable forest and open land areas, the forestry authorities should also examine whether fuel and its supporting conditions canbe reduced through targeted maintenance fire measures (burning out weedy layers) (preventive to allow preparatory defensive measures that go beyond the usual scope.
Not congruent. Only by installing liaison officers and relocating mobile command posts could an improvement be achieved. Furthermore, hurdles in technical communication (use and operation of call groups inthe BOS digital radio system) were identified. When situations escalate, the mutual deployment of liaison officers can ensure the mutual exchange of situation information and the coordination of operational measures. When deploying contingents to another federal state, ithas become established practice to send an advance command to assess the situation and prepare for deployment. Onthe one hand, this isdue tothe differentiated design ofthe respective fire and disaster protection laws. Onthe other hand, pre-coordinated operational procedures along state borders are not the rule, but rather the exception (for example, inthe Spree-Neisse district). The occurrence ofa vegetation fire along the state border Proposed solution: Local and supra-local authorities should jointly develop mission-specific and, if possible, uniform procedures depending on different operational scenarios and threat levels. Within the established command organization, suitable contact points must be established, from situational awareness transfer to harmonized procedures. Both technical and organizational synchronization processes are with the risk of spreading tothe other federal state appears possible atany time andis not limited tothe border area between the Free State of Saxony and the state to describe this. The personnel composition should include liaison officers and command units asa type of advance and follow-up command. Examples of concepts proposed bythe municipality of Zeithain (Meissen district, SN) and the Verbandsgemeinde Liebenwerda (EE) are worth mentioning here. Brandenburg. The latent risk encompasses all federal states bordering Brandenburg with correspondingly high forest fire risk classes. A regular, joint exchange of experiences between the federal states bordering Brandenburg (focus: BB-SN, BB-ST) to present the legal This approach can complement the framework conditions in order tonot only create understanding but also to identify and resolve technical and organizational challenges before the next cross-border deployment. 3.9.1 Deployment of advance teams Even inthe early stages of deployment, when responsibility still lies with the local authorities, coordination between neighboring authorities along territorial boundaries appears tobe regularly necessary. While this has been coordinated organizationally in advance andis nowa common practice within the state of Brandenburg, ithas not yet been established toa comparable extent across the state's borders. The local exchange of information between two responsible bodies isthe simplest In particular, operational measures (technical-tactical possibilities) and operational objectives were not permanently defined inthe same wayon the Brandenburg and Saxon sides and were and unbureaucratic solution without calling into question the respective local jurisdiction.
39United Nations Environment Programme (2022). Spreading like Wildfire – The Rising Threat of Extraordina-ry Landscape Fires. A UNEP Rapid Response Assessment. Nairobi.: https://wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/hand-le/ 20.500.11822/38372/wildfire_RRA.pdf (Zugriff: 15.12.2022) This trend, which has been subjectively observed inthe state of Brandenburg since 2018, gives an idea ofthe challenges that emergency response authorities may face inthe coming years and decades. The 2022 report ofthe United Nations Environment Programme39 also represents a further opportunity to raise awareness for the state of Brandenburg. The short-term risk of extreme vegetation fires will increase worldwide bya factor of1.08to 1.14 within the current decade. Bythe turn ofthe century, this risk factor is forecast tobe between 1.36and 1.57. However, a global forecast can only be differentiated based on local climate development and landscape and natural area design. canbe transferred, the risky complexities ofthe state of Brandenburg will tend notto be reduced bythe previously dominant pine stands and large, contiguous agricultural areas. At least during the long-term implementation phases of preventive measures, additional efforts inthe continued development of defensive forest fire protection are desirable, taking into account a persistent or further increasing risk. While itwas initially assumed that this wasa one-off anomaly inthe fire service, the conclusion ofthe 2022 forest fire season is clear: the hazard potential posed by vegetation bands has not diminished. The country's fire and disaster protection system, which relies primarily on volunteers, briefly reached a capacity limit in June and July 2022 that was difficult to compensate for. Rather, an increasing trend canbe observed. Inno other forest fire season inthe history ofthe state of Brandenburg were more settlement areas and their residents endangered than in Since the 2018 season atthe latest, major forest fire events have ledto a sensitization Fire behavior is site-specific dueto the interrelationships between forest, agricultural, and residential areas andis a defining feature ofthe landscape design inthe state of Brandenburg. Disentanglement and compensation measures will also be implemented over decades. Claim. Every preventive measure to minimize hazards is more sustainable than further optimization of defensive processes and capabilities. However, preventive measures, ranging from the creation of protective zones around settlements and the clearance of explosive ordnance tothe conversion of climate- and fire-resistant forests, areto be viewed asa lengthy and, in some cases, a generational task. The perceptions ofan increasingly extreme Specialized skills acquisition within the framework of training and further education isof particular importance. Only when specialized technology canbe integrated into operational tactics and capability development ina situation-appropriate manner can significant increases in effectiveness be achieved. This also requires interagency synchronization processes to ensure that forest fire protection, inthe interests of both population and nature conservation, isa common Not only investments inthe provision of special technology appear necessary to minimize the direct impacts of vegetation fires. Improvements in setup and operational processes during acute deployment phases can contribute to minimizing devastating personal injury and property damage, ascan special capability adaptation. Conclusion 4.
The past forest fire season has shown how important it will beto concentrate specialist personnel in prevention and operational preparation. In addition, the fields of action described inthe previous chapter must be continuously addressed and evaluated. The multitude of actors involved from the various BOS and specialist authorities inThe task must be viewed without rigid jurisdictional boundaries. Only through appropriate compromises can risks be reduced, but not completely eliminated. Intensive awareness-raising inthe wider societal context andan interdisciplinary understanding must become the pillars of sustainable vegetation fire prevention and control. Potsdam, April 2023
14467 Potsdam mik.brandenburg.de Editorial staff: Department 34 (Fire and Disaster Protection) Layout/Graphics editor Henning-von-Tresckow-Straße 9 - 13 Ministry ofthe Interior and Local Government ofthe State of Brandenburg (MIK) IMPRINT Phone: 0331 - 866 2025 E-Mail: oeffentlichkeitsarbeit@mik.brandenburg.deMIK | Press and Public Relations Title photo: Mario Hagen - stock.adobe.comAs of: April 2023 | digital edition