Above all, the forest serves asa drinking water reservoir, oxygen supplier, CO2 consumer to give emergency services the highest priority in operational planning, cher, asa timber supplier, extreme reducer (heavy rain (flood protection!), heat, outof. commitment to preserving the utility, protection and recreational functions of forests, Bush or heathland or agricultural land. When fighting vegetation fires, the safety ofthe A distinction is made between preventive and defensive fire protection. Preventive forest fire protection, which primarily falls under the responsibility ofthe state forestry ministries orthe respective forest owners, focuses on preventive measures. These include, among other things, the creation and maintenance of protective strips, forest fire barriers, fire water extraction points, and year-round accessible paths, early (forest) fire detection, and, last but not least, targeted information campaigns inthe media, for example, onthe current forest or grassland fire risk. 1. General information Fighting vegetation fires usually involves a Defensive forest fire protection, which falls under the responsibility ofthe state interior ministries or fire protection authorities, is characterized bythe classic ground and air-based firefighting methods Expert Recommendation No. 3of 16 June 2020 company. storm, noise and other) and last but not least asa (local) recreation area for industry Even inthe case of forest and other vegetation areas, a distinction is made between the This technical recommendation is based onthe versions first published in 2007 and updated in 2018. Ithas been revised in terms of content, taking into account operational experience from the forest fire years and the increasing useof aircraft. 1 Safety and tactics in vegetation fire operations1 DFV recommendation
in particular tobe able to communicate clearly with deployed aircraft recognizable tower ofa wind turbine) inthe estimated position ofa covered This means that inall measures the risk tothe emergency services must beas lowas possible For example, “from the direction of view ofthe standards must be defined. Ifno compass is available, directions canbe obtained from ato note! In order tobe able to orientate oneself better inthe event of extensive vegetation fires andan axis oftwo reference points (for example, a prominent church tower – which is clearly Directions are always tobe given in degrees (clockwise). The goal must beto geta fire under control as quickly as possible. A safe and effective useof all forces and resources is essential ben. as possible. Coordinate system (fire departments generally use UTM coordinates, while aircraft mostly use GPS data based onthe WGS-84 system). Ifa uniform system isnot possible, the "map datum" used for the location coordinates must be transmitted so that each unit can convert them if necessary. These begin with the coordination ofa uniform mapor The north position and map classification must be clearly determined and always kept available in order tobe able to react clearly to changes inthe situation (for example, wind changes direction and strength). Principle of vegetation fire fighting Church tower tothe wind turbine, from there attwo o'clock, smoke development." 
right shoulder left right flank Brandinsel links left Head Brandinsel (spot light) right back (cid:127) Fire inthe area ofthe ground (deep earth or humus, superficial ground, bush and trunk fires) andIn the case of vegetation fires, a distinction is also made between The areas ofa vegetation fire are designated as follows: differentiated. The type of fire and its further development depend onthe vegetation (stand conditions, stocking density, tree species, age classes), the topographical terrain conditions and the meteorological conditions (temperature, wind direction and strength as well asthe precipitation balance and thus also the air humidity). (cid:127) Fire inthe trees (full fire, crown fire)
 The birch isa deciduous tree, but its bark and even green leaves become inflamed much more quickly in extreme dryness, like those of other deciduous trees. (cid:127) Deciduous trees are used in today’s forestry in areas particularly prone to forest fires. When considering the influence of vegetation on fire protection, some important features canbe listed: than deciduous trees (beech, oak, maple, chestnut, ash, etc.). A special (cid:127) Conifers (pine, spruce, fir, larch, etc.) are particularly vulnerable to fire. 1.1 Influence of vegetation plants. (cid:127) Especially young conifers (thickets, poles) are particularly susceptible to fire and especially to full-blown fires dueto their branches that reach deep into the ground. endangered areas as natural fire-retardant barriers.
 in almost all forest-rich federal states inthe last decades. (cid:127) Fires ondry, cultivated land (cereals, oats, rye, etc.) naturally occur more frequently atthe endof summer orin Fire spread to areas with an increased risk of forest fires Even though the areas with high forest fire risk are located inthe German place. and heathland areas occur mainly in spring. Inthe context of operational tactics, it should always be taken into account that the Fires in hilly or mountainous areas can pose a particular danger. (cid:127) Inthe continental areas of East Germany (hot and low- Itis preferable to seal off endangered areas, asan effective fire-fighting attack mik and possibly the updraft upslope particularly quickly, therefore (cid:127) Dueto their low water retention capacity, sandy soils are generally less likely to pose a vegetation fire risk than water-rich clay soils. Autumn ahead. In case of emergency, these Fires spread in mountainous terrain dueto thermal radiation, ther- canbe. (cid:127) With the beginning ofthe spring months, the risk of forest fires (number of forest Germany. Nevertheless, experience shows that inthe case of prolonged dryness low-fire summer months), the vegetation fire risk is related tothe only possible with a large expenditure of personnel, technology and extinguishing agents it. Number and total area of damage usually higher than inthe other parts 1.2 Influence ofthe terrain and the subsoil (soil) (cid:127) Fires ofdry reeds spreading very quickly with the wind large vegetation fires were also recorded. Lowland plains (for example Lüneburg Heath, Brandenburg etc.) are located, isa fire-fighting attack orthe laying of containment lines above fire edges fires) is particularly high dueto the “dried-out vegetation”.
 (cid:127) Precipitation (precipitation totals, precipitation forecasts) tothe falling of trees without any discernible warning orthe collapse (sagging) of vehicles and people into burnt-through soil layers. http://www.wettergefahren.de/warnungen/indizes/waldbrand.html develop into the combustible soil layers. Asa result, itcan Statements on forest fire risk forecasts canbe found, for example, atIn order notto endanger the safety and health ofthe emergency services, the influence ofthe terrain and the subsoil must be taken into account when planning and carrying out the emergency measures (see also Section 15 (1) of DGUV Regulation 49). extremely critical. The rate of fire spread is often significantly reduced. men! stones or tree trunks in mountainous areas! (cid:127) Humidity ordew point temperature and1.3 Influence of meteorology In addition tothe biotopic conditions ofa forest stand (tree species, age, stocking, ground cover, etc.) and the geographical location, the meteorological parameters Added to this isthe risk of falling and the danger of loose (cid:127) Wind speed and direction, The fire can spread very quickly ona mostly flat surface, driven bythe wind. essential for the initiation, spread, and suppression of vegetation fires. A meteorologist should be involved inthe operational management of large forest fires, especially to determine the weather situation and predict weather developments (meteorological conditions). Fires in dried-outor former moorland (heath) canbe
 ter priority. of importance (for example, wind speed and wind direction). the intensity ofthe fire without endangering yourself. 3) Comprehensive firefighting attack onthe flank, containment ofthe front via the The indices represent a mathematical combination of different weather parameters, which, however, as individual factors inthe case ofuse, should notbe underestimated. begin to fight the fire front and secure the flanks, if this isIn contrast to fighting building fires, the first priority is proceed as follows: Always pay attention tothe grassland fire index, because this is especially important in1.4 Tactical priorities Inthe case of larger and dynamic vegetation fires, on each flank). inthe reeds is much more meaningful: only possible inthe rarest of cases and initially not tactically feasible bythe upper fighting vegetation fires as quickly as possible 1) Define and secure oneor more anchor points (for example, one Moor and heath areas as well asfor fires on agricultural land andof the fire source. A complete and immediate extinguishing ofthe entire area is2) From there, carry out the fire-fighting attack over both flanks. It should be noted that such vegetation fire danger indices only serve asa rough estimate ofthe general meteorological risk potential. The actual forestry risk on site may vary for various reasons. This isdue to various factors, such as storm and drought damage, deadwood dueto insect infestation and logging debris, as well as local, primarily topographically influenced weather conditions. The containment ofthe fire should only be carried outin the case of controllable fires with the shoulder and https://www.dwd.de/DE/leistungen/graslandfi/graslandfi.html
 Full fires, especially when the crowns have ignited and the fire wind- of vegetation areas. Of course, the fire development, the own possible from the side or from above. The use of water cannons in particular must therefore be examined critically. lines such as electricity and gas lines) usually takes priority over the protection Breaking an approaching full fire front is only possible with massive water use your retreat. Especially inthe early phase of forest and wildfires, 4) Comprehensive extinguishing work along the entire perimeter. Possibilities of combat in terms of tactics, but also in terms ofa safe 2.1Use of fire engines Ifthe extinguishing agent is water with an unnecessarily high application the vegetation and terrain asa natural holding or catch line) If this isnot possible, attempts canbe made to achieve a certain degree of protection against ignition by permanently wetting the area with water (for example, by means of stationary irrigation systems) orby applying a layer of foam orgel. In buildings, all windows and doors must be closed before a fire front arrives. the available and scarce resource of fire-fighting water was used extremely efficiently If this isnot possible, the player must bein a tactically advantageous position (favorable in terms of Close, special fire loads around the buildings (for example: equipment, vehicles, etc.) must be removed as quickly and thoroughly as possible. rate is output, the extinguishing water supply is used uptoo quickly. The protection of objects (buildings, industrial facilities, important infrastructure driven, can practically only be fought defensively! attempts to stop the fire front.
 side, the actual fire-fighting operation must first be carried outby setting upAn intensive flame development must be combated. A complete removal and journey is available orcan be created directly during the operation, Water from jet pipes should only be used to treat fire compartments with open flames andIf there isno safe turning possibility ina forest path or building access area will only be treated ina later step with another fire engine or security). For extinguishing ground fires, which account for the majority of forest fires in Extinguishing the fire edge and especially the entire affected fire must be retracted backwards in order tobe able to retreat quickly if necessary (own (basically a spray jet). This is especially true for reasons ofIf you look ata fire from behind with the wind, that is from the burnt Firefighting teams maybe possible. Germany, the use ofC andD pipes can certainly be Driving over fire lines can damage the vehicle's control or supply lines (e.g., compressed air, fuel, or hydraulics), causing the vehicle to stop onthe fire line. The vehicle must therefore be specially designed for this type of firefighting. To date, only afew such vehicles exist in Germany (for example, in Brandenburg or with the German Federal Armed Forces Fire Service). Until certainty is established, it should be assumed that the (firefighting) vehicles are unprotected against flames! The same applies to protecting the vehicle engine'sair filter from ignition by flying sparks. required amounts of water (C15/42 about 21 liters). place ofthe vehicle. “Maneuverability” ofthe lines inthe terrain and the hoses contained
 be equipped with flying sparks. hoses pose a risk. Roll-up hoses canbe easily uncoupled, vehicles are used as feeder vehicles. A water transfer point with ofa retreat, the firmly screwed, dimensionally stable rapid attack Tank fire engines should be used as attack vehicles, large and heavy tank fire engines Hose sections have a much lower pressure loss. For your own safety, it should always be possible touse an additional Cor D pipe. dividers canbe used over a wider area and have longer appropriate buffer capacity must be determined. and always about 300to 400 liters of water are retained inthe tank. Tank fire engines specifically designed for ground-based forest firefighting must be able to deliver extinguishing water ina controlled manner while driving (“pump and roll”) andbe designed for off-road use. Furthermore, they must, at least inthe future, be equipped with appropriate mechanical and thermal protection for the lines and protection ofthe air filter against ignition by Fire edges with intense flame formation (flames with a length of more than about two meters) should notbe attacked head-on, but rather from behind or from the sides. This minimizes the risk ofor theS-pipe, therefore not all pressure outlets should Part ofthe fire's edge is likely to become trapped. Ifthe area is confined and there isa risk ofa full-scale fire, a targeted, quick, and short-term application of more water, even from pipes with a greater throw range (e.g., from a water sprinkler), maybe appropriate. Dueto the inability to detach the hose couplings from the vehicle in case Small, maneuverable tank fire engines or specially developed forest fire Ifthe fire is attacked from the front, the vehicle should be positioned inthe direction of escape.
 The same applies to security zones. ignited byit. 2.2 Deployment of firefighting teams onthe ground Never leave vehicles with hot exhaust systems ondry fields or similar areas! There isa risk that the dry vegetation assign and use. switch. Equipped with backpack sprayers/fire extinguisher bags, fire beaters and shovels The use of wetting agents increases the effectiveness ofthe extinguishing water used This applies not only toall vehicles with catalytic converters located onthe vehicle floor (many cars with petrol engines), but also toan increasing number of Euro VI vehicles inthe future, which, in addition to often very hot exhaust systems, can either be manually switched to regeneration mode depending onthe chassis programming or, if there isno special vehicle programming, maybe automatically switched to this mode. Through the deployment of trained firefighting teams, which, among other things, is therefore a must. Never block access to forest roads with emergency or assigned vehicles, as these can serve as attack and, if necessary, escape routes for units. These escape routes must be marked and After use, check whether there are any embers or smoldering residues onthe chassis orin the area ofthe engine (e.g. air filter). and thus meets the generally prevailing lack of this and could have collected! To secure clearings, wound strips and objects. Suitable storage or assembly areas must be explored, Air foam, compressed air foam and gelling agents are particularly suitable for
 The useof multi-layer fire protection jackets and trousers according to Remaining fire and less intensely burning fire edges canbe extinguished with for example, the PSA 11 according to DGUV Information 205-014 (see also §14 sections with particularly intense flame formation onthe ground. The use ofa single-layer fire protection jacket and trousers is recommended In fields, dueto the strong root penetration ofthe soil, obtaining sand is usually too time-consuming; the use of backpack sprayers and fire beaters is most effective here. For work onthe fire edge, the firefighting teams should also be accompanied bya are, the wind can create fire edges with flame lengths ofup toone totwo Fire beaters and other suitable hand tools canbe used to combat the fire. DGUV Regulation 49). Equipment and tactics differ between the operational scenarios When working near fire edges, protective clothing must offer a good compromise between protection against brief flame contact, flying sparks and the best possible wearing comfort. The following safety instructions must be observed, particularly when emergency personnel are deployed ata fire. Flame protection hood. meters high. 2.3 Personal protective equipment Inthe forest, fires canbe extinguished using backpack sprayers/fire extinguishing bags and sand throwing. DINEN 469is too much ofa burden for the wearer in warm weather. Forest fire and field fire.
 Hot steam penetration is dangerous and should therefore be avoided! With tight-fitting safety goggles, working in slightly smoky Since ground-based forest firefighting often takes place under difficult conditions, according toDIN EN149) or forest fire scarf with integrated filter in conjunction The duty of fire service leaders to provide care and maintain the performance ofthe deployed emergency personnel in accordance with Section 3 (3) of DGUV Regulation 49 must be observed, for example by timely replacement, sufficient breaks, effective hygiene, and suitable catering (food and drinks). However, asan escape device, a breathing mask with a filter (CO- orand drink enough after use. The rule of thumb here isA fire helmet (as light as possible!) with neck scarf, suitable protective gloves areas. conditions where heavy physical work hasto be carried out, it should be Physiologically, it makes more sense to take afew sips every ten minutes, Wearing respiratory protection (respiratory protection connection with filter orair-independent The intentional wetting of protective clothing is prohibited dueto a possible Combination or "firefighter filter" A2B2E2K2-P3, but better with A2B2E2K2-P3-CO) should be carried. For longer and heavy physical work about one liter per hour. Shoes and boots are essential PPE. However, these filters are not suitable. instead of gulping down a liter after an hour – the body can puts too much strain onthe wearer. A particle-filtering half mask (e.g. FFP2 2.4 Protection against heat exhaustion breathing apparatus) is usually not required or burdensome.
 Notso suitable are pure sand shovels with a semi-circular or straight front hear among other things (cid:127) Forest fire or fire beaters small motor pumps. The composition ofthe work and extinguishing equipment for firefighting teams depends heavily onthe existing vegetative site conditions. canno longer pierce well.) (cid:127) Shovels (“Bavarian sand shovels”) are used for digging out soil and (cid:127) Backpack sprayers or fire extinguishing backpacks or similar Drinks should benon-carbonated water or (cid:127) Hoes (for example, so-called fire rakes or hoopoe hoes) (cid:127) Chain saws with suitable PPE and accessories (cid:127) Carrying frames for equipment and supplies Each emergency worker should have a personal supply of drinking water, for example init). suitable for targeted throwing and available everywhere, of course other (cid:127) D-hose material, C-DCD distributors, simple D-hollow jet nozzles Fruit juice spritzer canbe used. similarly shaped shovels or “forest fire shovels” canbe used The additional load kit "J" for forest fires, which has been standardized for several years according toDIN 14800-18, provides a good basic equipment for this purpose. Itcan and should be supplemented regionally according to existing special requirements, for example, with special hoes or axes or more hose material with portable 2.5 Working and extinguishing equipment, units, notes Leaf, because with this you can geta bit firmer soil with some grass roots Carry canteens or drinking systems with you.
 (cid:127) Forest and forestry roads accessible to emergency vehicles risk must be provided for. Alternative means of deployment such as forestry (cid:127) Possibilities for extracting fire water 2.6Use of aircraft Equipment specifically for forest fire fighting depending onthe individual (cid:127) Forestry, rescue and assembly points Milling machines, slurry tankers!) must be included inthe operational preparation. (cid:127) Areas at risk of full fire (e.g. with coniferous trees, damage/disaster In many places, special units are set upto fight forest fires depending onthe risk. and clearing vehicles, construction and agricultural machinery (wheel loaders, ploughs, (cid:127) Areas suspected of containing explosive ordnance are essential andin sufficient numbers (if possible also in digital combat platoon (also with mobile liaison units [motorcycles]), fire water supply Prepared forest fire protection maps with information onA logistics unit with the possibility ofon-site fuel supply andat least field repairs (for example, tire changes) should be community areas) provided and maintained, such as fire protection units, forest fire from association strength to each unit. form). transport train (with, for example, KdoW, GTLF, TLF 4000, WLF with AB tank) etc. (cid:127) exact place names In principle, itcan be stated that aerial vegetation fire fighting always serves only asa supporting measure to ground-based forest fire fighting. train (with, for example, KdoW/ELW1, 2x LF20-KatS, SW 2000), fire water
 can break through the drop) When approaching straight and dropping ina line, a range of20 to30 m lateral range and extinguishes any individual flames that maybe ahead ofthe line. emergency services) arein the drop area. The discharge must be carried outin such away that with each throw, a portion ofthe quantity (as seen across the width ofthe throw) is directed into the burning area anda portion onto the not-yet-directly-burning area along the fire line. This provides sufficient safety inthe never-completely straight line of fire, cools already heated (cid:127) Flight speed (here especially rotary-wing aircraft = helicopter or fixed-wing aircraft = fixed-wing aircraft) The control of multiple aircraft must be coordinated accordingly. Firefighting water drops from aircraft canbe used, among other things, to quickly The safety distance depends onthe flight axis. Inthe case of longer fire fronts or flanks, the drops must be Therefore, at least temporarily, a tactical division ofthe input and teams must be coordinated so that a suppressed fire (cid:127) Firefighting area (stand type, ageof the stand, trees/branches that (cid:127) Flight altitude tactically sensible. However, this must be done with the use of fire engines (cid:127) Container type and opening as well as sections bya different selection of resources per section Before dropping, ensure that no persons (emergency personnel/non- Emergency vehicles can also provide a safe place to retreat, but may be damaged bythe drop. cannot develop again.
 needs of aircraft. This also requires secure communication! tion of material and personnel transport). that can. as required (e.g. supply, refueling, fire-fighting water, organization Ground in direct communication with the aircraft coordinates the exact drop target, evacuation and resumption of ground-based firefighting operations. When water is dropped by aircraft, the force and weight ofthe water can seriously injure emergency personnel. Therefore, the additional useof aircraft in forest firefighting operations must be closely coordinated within the technical operations command. be possible, for example left flank: helicopter, right flank: ground units Itis always advisable touse a tactical coordinator whois (cid:127) Securing flight operations as required (e.g. crash team atthe landing site, water rescue in open waters, firefighting water intake…) Nevertheless, it must be ensured that immediately after setting the (cid:127) The selection of landing sites in consultation with the operations manager and the dined. ten). For larger or more complex situations, an Aircraft Operations Section Leader (EAL Air) should also be deployed. This leader advises the operations commander onthe aircraft deployment options and then implements the defined measures (e.g., aerial firefighting with three helicopters onthe right flank). Their responsibilities include: be continued immediately, otherwise effective deletion success cannot be guaranteed. (cid:127) The establishment ofthe landing sites including the necessary special logistics for each Airborne drops restore ground-based forest fire fighting
 therefore requires intensive supra-regional preliminary planning. This requires clarifying: However, itis very demanding. This work involves additional risks dueto before)? Fighting forest fires in very difficult terrain, for example on steep mountain slopes with rotary-wing aircraft isa fundamentally possible option, the armed forces or other armed forces, possibly private helicopter operators conditions (downdrafts, thermals, funnel effects). Therefore, even more experienced pilots with special mountain training are required. Available helicopters and the existing suspension systems can also be “flown” (rigid external load containers (e.g. LAB 5000)/Au- A special case of firefighting from the air (andin these cases often the from poorly visible obstacles (e.g. cable cars) and weather conditions (cid:127) Which ALBin which sizes are available and can be used with the Areas suspected of containing explosive ordnance (military training areas or areas The use of rotary-wing aircraft with external load containers (ALB) or other aircraft (e.g. for observation and command support) When using external fire water tanks on helicopters, please note External load folding container (for example Bambi Bucket)? only possibility ofa direct attack) isto fight fires on Please note that not all containers (foldable/rigid external cargo containers) canbe flown byall helicopter types (weight limits/towing capacity depend onthe individual helicopter type and its specific equipment or fuel supply), and not every helicopter type is readily available. Furthermore, the options for transporting loads can change significantly depending onthe required flight altitude. The higher the location and the more fuel the helicopter still carries, the smaller the loads that canbe flown. Service Regulation 500 also includes the distance rules defined bythe explosive ordnance disposal services (DGUV Rule 113-016 “Blasting work”)! (cid:127) Who can carry out such an operation (federal, state police, federal However, in addition tothe fire service,
 The technical means of communication are also available andan integration cunning? (especially wetting agents) should be provided. container required. (cid:127) Fixed-wing and rotary-wing aircraft (cid:127) What regional deployment time/readiness is achievable after the preliminary planning? When using aircraft, the use of extinguishing agent additives should also be (cid:127) drones and manned aircraft or seen? portable (foldable) fire water tanks in remote areas with (cid:127) Which fixed or foldable containers onthe ground are used, ifany? (cid:127) Are regional support units necessary or required for this? Likewise, external fire water tanks canbe used to shuttle to open screwdrivers are used in shuttle traffic, so transportable, depending o Water extraction from this container by helicopter (in addition to larger folding containers, waterproof roll-off containers are also suitable, for example AB Transport, collection or similar? (cid:127) How can the coordination of aircraft deployment be achieved? (This requires (cid:127) How should the alarm be raised inthe best possible and timely manner; operations are poor water supply. Should lifting requires usually subject toa charge. Depending onthe external load containers used, sufficiently large and stable open folding especially sturdy, foldable containers)? transfer tothe tactical operational command should be possible.) The parallel useof o Water delivery by helicopter into this container (here are
 The next stronger wind can then fan the fire again. This efficient useof firefighting water. (general fire watch) are complex and time-consuming. For example, damage to emergency personnel or vehicles; the requirement ofa This means that the irreplaceable fire-fighting work and the fire inspection (one ber also carry out the transport of external loads and personnel. For this purpose, the relevant guidelines for the transport of loads must be observed. entire burn area edge, i.e. the area between burnt (“black”) andin an operational area istoo dangerous and should therefore be avoided. Exceptions In otherwise difficult or inaccessible areas, itis possible touse helicopters The main tactical focus is therefore initially on securing the the front (i.e. with the wind direction), because here the greatest propagation relation- Coordination tasks ata significantly different level. Vegetation fires, especially ground fires, often involve deeper, flammable, not yet completely decomposed soil layers. Especially in former moorland areas, the fire can even spread underground and reemerge elsewhere. Embers can also be found in root fragments. become. unburned (“green”). The securing work should begin here at apply only to aircraft with observation or2.7 Follow-up extinguishing work and fire inspection There isa risk ofre-ignition. Ifhe misses the target, hecan not only cause injuries/damages Because the stock has already been attacked bythe fire, itcan initially spread even faster than the original, supposedly extinguished, fire. The discharge and transport of fire water from aircraft must always be well (pre-)
 suitable and sufficient illumination ofthe area of operation is required. Afterwards, if possible, you should also remove the embers inthe burnt area long time until all embers are safely found and extinguished. be used. Regular inspections within the fire watch are advisable. This must beand suffocate. Depending onthe situation on site, available fuel on both sides ofthe fire line search, open and extinguish or cover by working into soil or sand measured width and depth. A recurrence must be prevented. Ifthe fire area isto be secured inthe evening, night and morning hours, For larger fire areas, itis hardly possible or sensible todig up every square meter with aC-hose or hand tools. Experience has shown that there are certain areas where firefighters need to extinguish fires. Rootstocks/root areas (shrubs, grasses [reed grass]), areas with fallen wood (trunks), ditches, and generally thicker litter layers (e.g., coniferous litter), logging debris (e.g., cut branches, treetops), and not completely rotted humus layers (e.g., peat) are considered ember-holding points and should be addressed first. When securing the fire area, hose lines (Cor D) canbe used in full jet mode if sufficient water is available or hoses canbe laid there. Particularly in inaccessible areas, itis advisable for teams touse a combination of hand tools (e.g., hoop hoe, spade) and firefighting backpack or backpack. never, soil type, depth ofthe fuel (peat), weather (wind) and size ofthe entire fire area (clarity), the area tobe secured should be syringe touse. Forest fire or planting ploughs, tillers, wheel loaders or mulchers beets. This can also be done with machine support, for example bythe requirements of DGUV Regulation 49, the following generally applicable safety regulations Check the fire development. (cid:127) Wind suddenly picks upor changes direction (for example during thunderstorms). 3. Safety rules (cid:127) Check access tothe site before driving (e.g. height, (cid:127) Frontal attack ona fast-moving fire edge (cid:127) At least one portable radio per deployed unit (cid:127) Attacking a fire edge ina confusing situation (cid:127) Beginning of darkness For this purpose, itis advisable touse high-resolution thermal imaging cameras, among others, field, group, train). in order tobe able to detect changes inthe situation atan early stage. tion (cid:127) Contact with neighboring emergency services or units inthe tern) bride: For every usein larger forest and area fires, we recommend, in addition to Width, condition, turning ability, axle loads) and hazard situation inBe- (cid:127) No connection tothe operations management (cid:127) Attacking a fire edge without sufficient reconnaissance (cid:127) Water drops by fixed-wing/rotor-wing aircraft from aircraft (for example, police) or drones. (cid:127) Signal whistle or radio for each emergency worker (cid:127) Maximum distance ofthe emergency services within sight ofthe next emergency services There are situations where increased caution is required: (cid:127) Fire below your own position (cid:127) Fires caused by flying sparks and flying sparks behind your own position (cid:127) Proceed only in units or clear sub-units (squad, staff- section or even search beyond the section boundaries,
 sensing devices, whistle or horn). In order toThe acronym LACES has been adopted, which also translates well into German (for example, pressing the vehicle horn three times briefly, pause, repeat 3.3C for Communications = Ensuring communication tobe surprised by changes inthe situation. In addition, the following aspects must be considered. Internationally, In order tobe able to carry outa rescue operation inthe endangered area, a clear retreat signal should beIf itis not there, there isa great danger of sudden 3.1L for Lookout = observation post 3.2A for Anchorpoint = secure anchor points be involved atthe site. (cid:127) Danger of landslides when fighting vegetation fires in recultivated canbe transferred. tion, etc.) canbe agreed upon. Therefore, the aircraft used must also be securely integrated into the communication Land/water) or safely extinguished areas (a sufficiently large, definitely (cid:127) Suspicion of explosive devices, atthe latest when there are unclear flame events Todo so, he should use suitable equipment (binoculars, weather An independent observer should be present at each operational section to Every safe operation begins with oneor more anchor points. These canbe non- flammable areas (gravel surfaces, wide roads, crossing fourth mining areas sudden weather changes (wind) or fire islands (spot fires) the area protected from flashback). that gives something similar. change even under difficult conditions a quick evacuation ofthe A connection tothe operational command and within the unit is required for forest and nuisances (for example by burning phosphorus ammunition), explosions or
 emergency personnel. This canbe a road, a rocky area, ora body of water. If necessary, this must be created by removing vegetation. Ifit isnot clearly identifiable, it must be marked. 4. Handover ofthe site Partial areas ofthe operation were expanded and extended, in particular to have alow fire load and lead toa safety zone. The necessary size ofthe safety zone is determined bythe total number of emergency and support personnel deployed in this operational area or section! be! meror his representative(s) with the aim of transferring the tasks ofa Appropriate communication plans according to FwDV 800 must be drawn upand Marking procedures must be known toall After the firefighting has been completed, the site is handed over tothe owner. Notes 3.4E for Escape = ensure escape/rescue route Protective measures against a fire are safe anda fire edge prevents the3.5S for Safety = explore or create a safety zone Fire watch must be conducted. This must then be documented inthe incident report. to keep the entire operational process upto date. A safety zone isan area in which the emergency services can operate without further This technical recommendation will be supplemented inthe coming years by additions tothe This escape route must be known toall emergency services and should, if possible, it. to better coordinate cooperation with the other parties involved. Each operational section must have a previously selected escape route.
 accessed May7, 2020 Timing options for forest fires in Germany, University of Wuppertal- in Bavaria - State Fire Service School Würzburg – 2016 Verlag, Landsberg, 2008 – 2019 This expert recommendation was made bythe Forest Fire Working Group inthe German (cid:127) Cimolino, Dr. Ulrich: Analysis of operational experience and development ofop- (cid:127) Guidelines for cooperation between fire brigades and aircraft operators in: Fire Protection 03/2007, W. Kohlhammer Publishing, Stuttgart, 2007 (cid:127) Cimolino, Dr. Ulrich (ed.): Vegetation fire fighting, ecomed Verlag, Red Booklet No. 26, Publisher: W. Kohlhammer, Stuttgart resources and environmental protection. Fire brigades are advised touse their equipment within the framework of their conditions of, 2014 (cid:127) Liebeneiner, Ehrenfried: Fighting forest, moor and heath fires, Fire Brigade Association in close coordination with the Technical Committee on Operations, Extinguishing German State Ministries for Food, Agriculture and Forestry andof the Interior dated 9 April 2013 Ref.: F3-7746-1/20and ID4-2252.15-21 related training based on this specialist recommendation. cf. https://www.waldwissen.net/waldwirtschaft/schaden/brand/fva_waldbrand_wb4/index_DE Landsberg, 2015 (cid:127) Guidelines for forest fire prevention, joint announcement ofthe Bavarian (geography, vegetation, weather conditions, equipment) andto determine the operational (cid:127) Kaulfuß, Susanne: Silvicultural measures for forest fire prevention, (cid:127) Südmersen, Jan (ed.): SER Forest and Area Fire Fighting, ecomed (cid:127) Cimolino, Dr. Ulrich: Operations Manager Manual, ecomed, Landsberg, asof: 2020 (cid:127) König, Dr. Hans-C.: Forest Fire Protection – Compendium for Forestry and Fire Service, Fachverlag Grimm/Edition Gefahrabwehr, 2007 (cid:127) Witthoff, Diethelm – LSTE Borkheide: Fighting forest fires from the air; Your contact: Carsten-Michael Pix / Phone (030) 288 848 8-28 / Email pix@dfv.org Literature references
 Experts and approved bythe relevant departments and the DFV Executive Board The authors orthe German Fire Brigade Association are not liable fire operation” was carried outto the best ofour knowledge and with the greatest care byour Disclaimer: The expert recommendation “Safety and tactics in vegetation butis fundamentally excluded.