Management today Volume 63 • No. 4 • Fall 2003 W ILDLAND FIRE B EHAVIOR CASE S TUDIES ANDA NALYSES : PART 2W ILDLAND FIRE B EHAVIOR CASE S TUDIES ANDA NALYSES : PART 2
Fire Management Todayis published bythe Forest Service ofthe U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, DC. The Secretary of Agriculture has determined that the publication of this periodical is necessary inthe transaction ofthe public business required bylaw of this Department. Fire Management Todayis for sale bythe Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, at: Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: 202-512-1800 Fax: 202-512-2250 Mail: Stop SSOP, Washington, DC 20402-0001 Fire Management Todayis available onthe World Wide Webat <http://www.fs.fed.us/fire/fmt/>. AnnM. Veneman, Secretary April J. Baily U.S. Department of Agriculture General Manager Dale Bosworth, Chief Robert H. “Hutch” Brown, Ph.D. Forest Service Managing Editor Jerry Williams, Director Madelyn Dillon Fire and Aviation Management Editor Carol LoSapio Guest Editor Martin E. Alexander, Ph.D., and David A. Thomas Issue Coordinators TheU.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination inall its programs and activities onthe basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, or marital or family sta- tus. (Not all prohibited bases apply toall programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA’s TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD). Tofile a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 1400 Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice and TDD). USDA isan equal opportunity provider and employer. Disclaimer: The use of trade, firm, or corporation names in this publication isfor the information and convenience ofthe reader. Such use does not constitute an official endorsement ofany product or service bythe U.S. Department of Agriculture. Individual authors are responsible for the technical accuracy ofthe material presented in Fire Management Today. Editor’s note: This issue of Fire Management Today continues a series of reprinted articles, some of them decades old. Although the articles appear in today’s format, the text is reprinted largely verbatim and therefore reflects the style and usage ofthe time. We made minor wording changes for clarity, added inter- titles and metric conversions where needed, and occasionally broke up paragraphs to improve readability. All illustrations are taken from the original articles. Erratum In Fire Management Today 63(3) [Summer 2003], the article by Banks and Little contains an error noted in Fire Control Notes 26(1) [Winter 1965], page 15. The third sentence in column 3on page 76 should read: “More recent burns that left some surface fuel remaining only reduced the damage, but others that removed nearly all the fuelsdid stop the fire.”
C ONTENTS Wildland Fire Behavior Case Studies and Analyses: Other Examples, Methods, Reporting Standards, and Some Practical Advice. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4M.E. Alexander andD.A. Thomas The Carolina Blowup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 Keith A. Argow Black Wednesday in Arkansas and Oklahoma—1971 . . . . . . . 15 Rollo T. Davis and Richard M. Ogden Jet Stream Influence onthe Willow Fire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 John H. Dieterich Predicting Major Wildland Fire Occurrence. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 Edward A. Brotak and William E. Reifsnyder The Bass River Fire: Weather Conditions Associated With a Fatal Fire. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25E.A. Brotak The Mack Lake Fire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29 Albert J. Simard Behavior ofthe Life-Threatening Butte Fire: August 27–29, 198531 Richard C. Rothermel and Robert W. Mutch New Jersey, April 1963: CanIt Happen Again? . . . . . . . . . . 40 Joseph Hughes Horizontal Vortices and the New Miner Fire. . . . . . . . . . . . . 45 Donald A. Haines An Overview ofthe 1987 Wallace Lake Fire, Manitoba . . . . . 48 Kelvin G. Hirsch Documenting Wildfire Behavior: The 1988 Brereton Lake Fire, Manitoba. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50 Kelvin G. Hirsch Horizontal Roll Vortices in Complex Terrain . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54 Donald A. Haines andL. Jack Lyon Fire Behavior in High-Elevation Timber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56 Mark Beighley and Jim Bishop The Haines Index and Idaho Wildfire Growth. . . . . . . . . . . . . 63 Paul Werth and Richard Ochoa Low-Level Weather Conditions Preceding Major Wildfires . . . . 67 Edward A. Brotak Those Really Bad Fire Days: What Makes Them So Dangerous?72Dan Thorpe A Race That Couldn’tBe Won . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75 Richard C. Rothermel and Hutch Brown The South Canyon Fire Revisited: Lessons in Fire Behavior . . . 77 Bret W. Butler, Roberta A. Bartlette, Larry S. Bradshaw, Jack D. Cohen, Patricia L. Andrews, Ted Putnam, Richard J. Mangan, and Hutch Brown Fire Management Today Announces Winners of 2003 Photo Contest. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85 Madelyn Dillon S HORT F EATURES Websites on Fire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84 Guidelines for Contributors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90 Firefighter and public safety isour first priority. Volume 63 • No. 4 • Fall 2003 Management today - Smoke is drawn into the cen- terof a3,200-acre (1,300-ha) prescribed burn unit onthe Lower Klamath National Wildlife Refuge in California. The growing need for fire use nationwide makes it more important than ever for land managers to fully understand fire behavior. The photo wasa winner in Fire Management Today’s photo contest for 2003 (see page 85for more onthe contest). Photo: Troy Portnoff, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Tulelake, CA, 2002. The FIRE 21 symbol (shown below andon the cover) stands for the safe and effective useof wildland fire, now and throughout the 21st cen- tury. Its shape represents the fire triangle (oxy- gen, heat, and fuel). The three outer red triangles represent the basic functions of wildland fire organizations (planning, operations, and aviation management), and the three critical aspects of wildland fire management (prevention, suppres- sion, and prescription). The black interior repre- sents land affected by fire; the emerging green points symbolize the growth, restoration, and sustainability associated with fire-adapted ecosystems. The flame represents fire itself asan ever-present force in nature. For more informa- tion on FIRE 21and the science, research, and innovative thinking behind it, contact Mike Apicello, National Interagency Fire Center, 208- 387-5460. Onthe Cover:
ILDLAND IRE EHAVIOR CASE S TUDIES ANDA NALYSES : O THER E XAMPLES , M ETHODS , R EPORTING S TANDARDS , ANDS OMEP RACTICAL A DVICE M.E. Alexander andD.A. Thomas Case studies done inone country canbe applied to another, if fuel type characteristics are rel- evant, by interpreting burning con- ditions through the other country’s fire danger rating system. This special issue of Fire Manage- ment Today constitutes the second installment of articles involving fire behavior case studies and analyses of wildland fires. All arti- cles in this series appeared in past issues of Fire Management Today orits predecessors. The18 articles in this issue arein chronological order, from 1967 to 2001. Inthe lead article tothe first installment (Fire Management Today, volume 63(3) [Summer 2003]), we overviewed the value, approaches, and practical uses of fire behavior case studies and analyses (Alexander and Thomas 2003). Here we point out examples of case studies published elsewhere (both nationally and international- ly) and offer some general thoughts on wildland fire behavior observa- tion and documentation. Other Examples of Case Studies Fire Management Today and its predecessors have certainly not been the only source or outlet for case studies. Inthe last issue ofthe journal, we cited some examples of other sources (Alexander and Thomas 2003). Others are cited below. USDA Forest Service fire research- ers, in collaboration with other investigators, have published a number of case studies inthe form of journal articles, conference papers, andin-house station publi- cations. Notable examples include studies onthe: • 1965 Hellgate Fire, western Virginia (Taylor and Williams 1968); • 1966 Gaston Fire, central South Carolina (DeCoste and others 1968); • 1966 Loop Fire, southern California (Countryman and oth- ers 1968); • 1967 Sundance Fire, northern Idaho (Anderson 1968); • 1968 Canyon Fire, southern California (Countryman and oth- ers 1969); • 1971 Little Sioux Fire, northeast- ern Minnesota (Sando and Haines 1972); • 1971 Air Force Bomb Range Fire, eastern North Carolina (Wade and Ward 1973); • 1980 Mack Lake Fire, northern Lower Michigan (Simard and others 1983); • 1990 Dude Fire, northern Arizona (Goens and Andrews 1998); and the • 1994 South Canyon Fire, west- central Colorado (Butler and oth- ers 1998).* Inthe 1990s, the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) pro- duced several case studies, in very glossy formats, onthe following wildfires: • 1989 Black Tiger Fire, central Colorado (NFPA 1990); • 1990 Stephan Bridge Road Fire, northern Lower Michigan (NFPA 1991); • 1991 Spokane area fires, north- eastern Washington (NFPA 1992a); and • 1991 Oakland–Berkeley Hills Fire, west-central California (NFPA 1992b). Afew of these U.S. case studies are available onthe World Wide Webor in hard copy fora nominal fee through the National Fire Equipment System (NFES 2003). * Foran overview of this excellent publication, see the very fine summary prepared by Butler and others (2001) on page 77in this issue of Fire Management Today. Marty Alexander isa senior fire behavior research officer with the Canadian Forest Service atthe Northern Forestry Centre, Edmonton, Alberta; and Dave Thomas isthe regional fuels specialist for the USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Ogden, UT. The most important thing to record isthe position ofthe head fire at various times—the more observations, the better.
Canadian Forest Service fire researchers have also formally pre- pared several case studies over the years onthe following wildfires: • 1964 Gwatkin Lake Fire, eastern Ontario (Van Wagner 1965); • 1968 Lesser Slave Fire, central Alberta (Kiil and Grigel 1969); • 1971 Thackeray and Whistle Lake Fires, northeastern Ontario (Walker and Stocks 1972); • 1980 DND-4-80 Fire, east-central Alberta (Alexander and others 1983); • 1986 Terrace Bay7/86 Fire, north-central Ontario (Stocks 1988); and • 2001 Duffield Fire, central Alberta (Mottus 2002). Australasian fire researchers have also made numerous contribu- tions, including studies onthe fol- lowing wildfires: • 1955 Balmoral Fire, South Island ofNew Zealand (Prior 1958); • 1958 Wandilo Fire, South Australia (McArthur and others 1966); • 1977 Western District fires, Victoria (McArthur and others 1982); • 1979 Caroline Fire, South Australia (Geddes and Pfeiffer 1981); • 1983 Ash Wednesday fires, South Australia (Keeves and Douglas 1983); • 1991 Tikokino Fire, North Island ofNew Zealand (Rassmusen and Fogarty 1997); • 1994 Karori fires, North Island ofNew Zealand (Fogarty 1996); • 1995 Berringa Fire, west-central Victoria (Tolhurst and Chatto 1998); • 2002 Atawhai Fire, South Island ofNew Zealand (Peace and Anderson 2002); and • 2003 Miners Road Fire, South Island ofNew Zealand (Anderson 2003). The Australians have also pub- lished several case studies analyz- ing the effectiveness of fuel reduc- tion burning on subsequent fire behavior andon fire suppression of high-intensity wildfires (e.g., Buckley 1992; Underwood and oth- ers 1985). Case studies have been undertaken by fire researchers in other coun- tries as well (Cruz and Viegas 1997; Dentoni and others 2001). Itis worth noting that one can extend the usefulness of wildland fire case studies done inone country to another, provided that the fuel type characteristics are relevant, simply by interpreting the burning condi- tions through the use ofthe other country’s fire danger rating system (e.g., Alexander 1991, 1992, 2000; Alexander and Pearce 1992a, 1993). Field Observations and Records Whereas no recipe or step-by-step procedural manual on wildland fire observations presently exists, a good number of general references are available (Alexander and Pearce 1992b; Burrows 1984; Cheney and Sullivan 1997; Chester and Adams 1963; Rothermel and Rinehart 1983; Turner and others 1961). Moreover, the various case studies already published offer guidance themselves. Wildland fire observation and doc- umentation canbe broken into four distinct stages or phases: 1. Detection, 2. Initial attack, 3. Later stages of suppression, and4. After containment. Some ofthe information onthe early phases ofa wildland fire is normally recorded as part ofthe operational procedures related to completing the individual fire report, although additional data might be requested (e.g., Haines and others 1985). However, ifwe areto acquire high-quality data (Donoghue 1982), then we need to emphasize the importance of fire behavior observation/documenta- tion for our initial-attack firefight- ersso that weget their “buy-in.” Although myriad things might be recorded between the time ofini- tial attack and the time when a fire is finally deemed “out,” the most important thing to record isthe position ofthe head fire at various times—the more observations, the better. From these observations, the rates of fire spread and intensi- tycan be calculated. At times, these observations are difficult to make, fora variety of reasons, such as limited visibility and logistical issues (see the sidebar on page 6). When they canbe made, they must be coupled with observations or measurements of wind velocity. Although advances in photography, remote sensing and weather moni- toring technology over the years have greatly facilitated matters (Anderson 2001; Dibble 1960; Lawson 1975; Ogilvie and others 1995; Schaefer 1959, 1961; Warren and Vance 1981), good representa- tive or site-specific wind readings, for example, are still difficult to obtain. In this regard, one should not discount the relative value ofThe challenge of writing a case study report isto distill the mass of information into a coherent summary.
field observers using the Beaufort Wind Scale (Jemison 1934; List 1951) asa simple means of acquir- ing estimates of windspeed. Several forms exist for eventually developing a wildland fire case study (e.g., Rothermel and Rinehart 1983; Rothermel and Hartford 1992). However, forms can sometimes deter data gather- ing; an observer might cringe atthe thought of completing yet another form. Remember, the most important information to gather isthe time/location ofthe head fire and the corresponding windspeed. The old adage is true: A picture is worth a thousand words. In case studies, however, itis worth more to record the time and location. One should consider obtaining ver- tical aerial photography ofthe fire area relatively soon after the fire’s occurrence, especially in forested areas. This is often a very useful tool in carrying outa case study investigation. Report Preparation and Documentation Case study reports on wildland fire behavior vary tremendously in length and complexity. They range from short, very simple descrip- tions (e.g., USDA Forest Service 1960) to very large and extremely detailed, comprehensive accounts (e.g., Graham 2003a, 2003b). One should notbe intimidated bythe sheer size and level of detail in some case study reports; their bulk should not discourage you from preparing some type of report, no matter how short. The size ofa report is often driven by fire size and duration. A brief account might suffice fora specific issue (e.g., Countryman 1969) orfor a particular situation or event during an incident (e.g., Pirkso and others 1965; Sutton 1984). Fora long incident, a more volumi- nous publication might be more appropriate, with numerous appen- dixes to document the fire (e.g., Bushey 1991). Regardless of size, all reports have some things in common, such as descriptions ofthe components ofthe fire envi- ronment, although the level of detail might vary. Distractions From Making Fire Behavior Observations Brown and Davis (1973) identify some ofthe distractions ona fire that can keep one from preparing good wildland fire behavior case studies. A common deficiency of most analyses of large fires is that the detail and sequence of what men did in their efforts to bring the fire under control overshadow what the fire did. This isa natural outcome. Usually all participants areso fully engaged in other emergency duties that noone is available to make objective and continuing firsthand observations ofthe fire itself. Sothe fire’s over- all behavior, and particularly the time and sequence of significant changes inits behavior, are uncertain and are likely tobe poorly reconstructed from cir- cumstantial evidence. This seri- ously limits the validity of conclu- sions drawn asto the adequacy or inadequacy ofthe efforts made to control it. The case study can usually correct this difficulty. Ideally, itis planned in advance and carried outby a trained research team who moves inas soon asit is apparent that a blowup fire isin progress. By means of observation and measurements, such a team develops a detailed time history ofthe fire. Usually this isthe form a detailed logof events anda care- fully drawn map showing the spread ofthe fire at various time intervals. In addition to such information, detailed weather measurements are sought … As better understanding and pre- diction of large-fire behavior develops, analysis of action on large fires and the more compre- hensive case studies as well will become more meaningful and consequently more valuable in training men and in planning fire suppression strategy. Make ita habit to always prepare at least aone- totwo-page case study— it will hone your skills asa predictor of fire behavior.
After compiling all the information required to produce a case study report, one must write itup. The challenge isto distill the mass of information into a coherent sum- mary. To assist in this process, we suggest a certain format (see the sidebar below). The case study by Pearce and others (1994) isa good example ofa very concise report based on this format. Other sections could be added tothe format, such as fire effects on people (both firefighters and the public), homes, and ecosystems. The suppression strategy and tac- tics could also be addressed, including any associated human factors. However, as Thomas (1994) points out, not all ofus are writers. Some might wish to follow aone- ortwo- page format (e.g., McAlpine and others 1990 [figure 2]). Ideally, it should include a photograph ortwo and additional weather prod- ucts (surface and upper air charts and profiles of temperature/mois- ture and winds aloft). Some General Advice and Lessons Learned Weoffer the following practical advice in preparing wildland fire behavior case studies. Our thoughts and comments are based on actual lessons learned from preparing case studies (e.g., Carpenter and others 2002; Pearce and others 1994). Suggested Outline for Preparing a Wildland Fire Behavior Case Study Report These guidelines are based in part on those originally prepared byM.E. Alexander for use in three advanced fire behavior courses sponsored bythe National Rural Fire Authority inNew Zealand in 1992–93. The guidelines were subsequently used insix wildland fire behavior specialist courses sponsored bythe Canadian Interagency Forest Fire Centre in Hinton, Alberta, in 1996–2001. 1. Introduction: Significance ofthe fire, including regional map with fire location. 2. Fire Chronology and Development: Cause; time of origin and/or detection; initial attack action; forward spread and perimeter growth; fire characteristics, such as spot- ting distances and crowning activity; suppression strategy and tactics employed; mopup difficulty; fire progress map showing point of origin; final area burned and perimeter; ground and aerial photos, where possible. 3. Details ofthe Fire Environment: • Topography—Review major features; include topograph- icmap and photos, if perti- nent. • Fuels—Describe the princi- pal fuel type(s); include a vegetation cover type map and any photos, if possible.* • Fire Weather—Describe prefire weather as appropri- ate; summarize synoptic weather features and include surface map; pres- ent daily fire weather obser- vations; present fire danger ratings, including drought indexes, and append month- ly fire weather record form; present hourly weather observations, if relevant; denote location of weather station(s) on regional mapor fire progress map and comment onthe relevance ofthe readings tothe fire area, including notes about the station’s instrumenta- tion.** 4. Analysis of Fire Behavior: For example, discuss the fire’s behavior in relation tothe characteristics ofthe fire environment and the suc- cess/failure ofthe suppression operations. 5. Concluding Remarks: For example, what did you learn about predicting fire behavior and fire behavior documenta- tion from this assignment? **Itis a good idea to cultivate a long-term relation- ship with your local fire weather meteorologist/fore- caster and seek their assistance asa cooperator. Ifone isn’t careful, the plethora of information can stymie even the most dedicated case study author. *Detailed work on fuel characteristics (e.g., amounts by fuel complex strata, moisture content of live fuels) will depend onthe situation and the specific need. Generalizations are often satisfactory for most purposes.
Motivation. Itis often very difficult to find the motivation to write a case study. Onall wildland fires, other demands and the rapidity of events canbe discouraging. Moreover, no policy or regulation requires a case study. It must come from your own motivation and sense of professionalism. Lesson Learned: Asa practitioner, make ita habit to always prepare at least aone- totwo-page case study. You will be richly rewarded, forit will force youto reflect onwhy a fire behaved the way it, honing your skills asa predictor of fire behavior (see the sidebar). Your Standard IsToo High. There isa human tendency to establish goals that are nearly impossible to reach. Lesson Learned: Limit the length and depth ofthe report tothe time available. Don’t think you have to write a research report that meets the quality standards ofa fire laboratory publication. Asim- ple, short case study, told from your individual perspective, isbet- ter than no case study atall. Organization. Just aswe must practice our fire behavior predic- tion skills before going ona wild- fire, soit is also important tomen- tally prepare ourselves for writing a case study. Lesson Learned: Get organized before the fire season begins. Prethink how you are going to prepare your case studies. Ask yourself what generic fire behavior information you are going to need (such as fire danger ratings, remote automatic weather station data, or fuel moisture readings), and prepare yourself to quickly access the information. Useful Webpages include the Western Regional Climate Center (http://www.wrcc.dri.edu) and the U.S. Drought Monitor (http://www.drought.unl.edu). Become familiar with such sources before the fire occurs. Finally, be systematic in your collection of data. An indexed, three-ring note- book constructed around the themes of observed fire behavior, such as fuels, topography, and weather, will help you organize pertinent information for easy retrieval. Information Overload. The amount of information available about the fire environment canbe overwhelming. Ifone isn’t careful, the plethora of information can stymie even the most dedicated case study author. Lesson Learned: Don’ttry touse or validate every fire danger, fire weather, or fire behavior model available. Decide which model you want touse for your case study and stick toit. For example, ask yourself whether the BEHAVE fire behavior prediction system would meet your need as opposed to FARSITE. Think about the amount of time you have avail- able torun various models. Pick the Why Write a Case Study? Luke and McArthur (1978) give a good rationale for writing wildland fire behavior case studies, even on small incidents: Inquiries should be made into all fires as soon as possible after they have been controlled. Even short descriptions of very small fires have a value.* Recording the details of large fires is vital because success inthe future depends largely on knowledge gained inthe past. Amap showing the perimeter ofa fire at progressive time intervals provides the best basis fora case history analysis. This should be accompanied by descriptions of fire behavior related to weather, fuel and topography, and details ofthe manning arrangements, strat- egy and tactics employed during each suppression phase. Particular attention should be given to initial attack action.… Atthe conclusion ofthe analysis it should be possible to prepare a précis ofthe reasons for success or failure, not for the purpose of taking people to task for errors of judgment, but solely to ensure that the lessons that have been learnt contribute tothe success of future suppression operations. Form your own view of what happened only after interviewing many firefighters and getting multiple perspectives. *Itis true that wedo naturally tend to focus solely on just the conflagration type wildland fires.
model that meets the time available. Sources of Information. Secondary sources of fire behavior informa- tion are often as important aspri- mary sources. Ina way, the prepa- ration ofa fire behavior case study is like detective work: You are always onthe hunt for clues explaining why your fire behaved the way itdid. Lesson Learned: Don’t depend solely onthe stan- dard sources of fire behavior infor- mation, such as models, Websites, and fire weather forecasts. For example, photographs or video taken by newspaper or television* and amateur photographers canbe rich sources of fire behavior data. Even articles in general magazines can offer different perspectives on your case study. Interviewing. Interviews with fire- fighters area common source of fire behavior information. Butbe careful, for recollections are prone to hindsight bias. Recollections of fire events are often flawed, and they always reflect only a single point of view. Lesson Learned: When interviewing firefighters, be aware of hindsight bias. Always compare one person’s memory ofthe fire with another’s. Be skepti- cal. Seek information that dis- proves strongly held cause–effect relationships. Form your own view of what happened only after inter- viewing many firefighters and get- ting multiple perspectives. Fire Behavior Model Versus Reality. Itis understandable when fire behavior specialists or analysts lament the fact that a fire behavior model did not predict what actually happened. But such discrepancies are simply part of making fire behavior predictions, and they will never fully disappear. Oneof the most interesting purposes ofa fire behavior case study isto compare the projection against reality. Lesson Learned: In every case study, compare the fire behavior projection or prediction to what actually happened. Then discuss why the fire didor did not behave as predicted. Inso doing, you will be honing your fire behavior pre- diction skills. Peer Review. A case study, inthe end, isthe official fire behavior record. Your reputation ison the line. Lesson Learned: Time per- mitting, get peer review. Simply ask your colleagues what they think of your case study. It will ease your anxiety and improve your final product. Butbe prepared for con- trary opinions, and don’tbe intimi- dated when others think differently. Always remember that fire behavior is complex and not easily captured ina report. You are doing the best you can. Case Study Publication. You’ve prepared a case study. Now how are you going to distribute your report so that it will be useful tothe fire community? Lesson Learned: A logical location for case studies are the Websites of local or national fire management agencies, such asthe National Interagency Fire Center orthe geographic coordina- tion centers. Another possible loca- tion isthe Lesson’s Learned Center atthe National Advanced Research Technology Center in Marana, AZ ((http://www.wildfirelessons.net/). Butbe careful about including color digital photographs with your report. Although photographs are truly worth a thousand words, they can bog down e-mail systems and limit the distribution of your report, although some of these obstacles canbe overcome (Christenson 2003). Just DoIt. If fire behavior case studies areto become routine—our hope for more than a decade—then you must make a personal commit- ment to prepare them. Lesson Learned: A fire behavior model cannot make a commitment; only an individual can. We hope that nothing will hold you back. When it comes to fire behavior case studies, we hope that you will, asthe saying goes, “Just doit!” More Case Studies Needed! In 1976, Craig Chandler, then Director ofthe Forest Service’s Division of Forest Fire and Atmospheric Sciences Research, pointed out that many wildland fire behavior case studies were pro- duced by fire researchers and fire weather meteorologists during the 1950s and 1960s, but that hehad not seen many lately, presumably dueto “higher priorities elsewhere” (Chandler 1976). He suggested that “we reexamine our priorities.” Alexander (2002) has proposed establishing permanent, full-time national operational fire behavior research units. But there is also the opportunity to help oneself directly. * Inquire as soon as possible (within at least 24 hours) about the availability of videotape footage, because the complete record is typically not archived. If every fire manager and fire researcher made ita personal goal topro- duce one case study per year, just think how many case studies could be produced ina 20- to35-year career!
Chandler’s comment is still valid for everyone involved in wildland fire, not just scientists and forecast- ers. We should be observing/document- ing wildland fires and preparing case studies not for fear of litiga- tion (Underwood 1993), but rather to improve our understanding of fire behavior for the safe and effec- tive management of wildland fires (Countryman 1972). If every fire manager and fire researcher made ita personal goal to produce one case study per year, regardless of size, just think how many case studies could be produced ina 20- to35-year career! Asit stands now, less than one-tenth of1 percent ofall wildland fires are properly ana- lyzed and documented. We must do better. Acknowledgments The authors offer their sincerest heartfelt appreciation to Hutch Brown, Madelyn Dillon, and Carol LoSapio, editors of Fire Manage- ment Today, for their significant contributions to this special issue, andto April Baily, the journal’s general manager, for supporting the concept of these special issues on wildland fire behavior. Their dedication and outstanding editori- al abilities have brought “life” to many ofthe articles contained in this issue that have long been for- gotten. References Alexander, M.E. 1991. The 1985 Butte Fire in central Idaho: A Canadian perspective onthe associated burning conditions. In: Nodvin, S.C.; Waldrop, T.A., eds. Proceedings ofthe International Symposium on Fire and the Environment: Ecological and Cultural Perspectives; 1990 March 20–24; Knoxville, TN: Gen. Tech. Rep. SE–69. Asheville, NC: USDA Forest Service, Southeastern Forest Experiment Station: 334–343. Alexander, M.E. 1992. The 1990 Stephen Bridge Road Fire: A Canadian perspective onthe fire danger conditions. Wildfire News & Notes. 6(1): 6. Alexander, M.E. 2000. The Mann Gulch Fire and the Canadian Forest Fire Danger Rating System. In: Preprints, Third AMS Symposium on Fire and Forest Meteorology; 2000 January 9–14; Long Beach, CA: American Meteorological Society: 97–98. Alexander, M.E. 2002. The staff ride approach to wildland fire behavior and firefighter safety awareness training: a commentary. Fire Management Today. 62(4): 25–30. Alexander, M.E.; Janz, B.; Quintilio, D. 1983. Analysis of extreme wildfire behav- iorin east-central Alberta: A case study. In: Preprint Volume, Seventh Conference on Fire and Forest Meteorology; 1983 April 25–29; Fort Collins, CO: Boston, MA: American Meteorological Society: 38–46. Alexander, M.E.; Pearce, H.G. 1992a. Follow-upto the Spokane area Firestorm’91 report: What were the Canadian fire danger indices? Wildfire News & Notes. 6(4): 6–7. Alexander, M.E.; Pearce, H.G. 1992b. Guidelines for investigation and docu- mentation of wildfires in exotic pine plantations. Report prepared for 12th Meeting ofthe Australian Forestry Council Research Working Group (RWG) No. 6 – Fire Management Research, 1992 December 9; Creswick, Victoria. Alexander, M.E.; Pearce, H.G. 1993. The Canadian fire danger ratings associated with the 1991 Oakland-Berkeley Hills Fire. Wildfire News & Notes 7(2): 1, 5. Alexander, M.E.; Thomas, D.A. 2003. Wildland fire behavior case studies and analyses: Value, approaches, and practical uses. Fire Management Today. 63(3): 4–8. Anderson, H.E. 1968. Sundance Fire: an analysis of fire phenomena. Res. Pap. INT–56. Ogden, UT: USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. Anderson, K. 2001. NIFC RAWS unit sur- vives burnover. Fire Management Today. 61(2): 39–42. Anderson, S. 2003. The Miners Road Fire of2nd February 2003. Fire Tech. Trans. Note 28. Christchurch, NZ: New Zealand Forest Research, Forest and Rural Fire Research Programme. [http://www/ forestresearch.co.nz/five] Brown, A.A.; Davis, K.P. 1973. Forest fire: Control and use. 2nded. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Book Company: 511–512. Buckley, A.J. 1992. Fire behavior and fuel reduction burning: Bemm River wildfire, October 1988. Australian Forestry. 55: 135–147. Burrows, N.D. 1984. Describing forest fires in Western Australia. Tech. Pap. No. 9. Perth, WA: Forests Department of Western Australia. Bushey, C.L. 1991. Documentation ofthe Canyon Creek Fire, volumes 1and 2. Contr. Rep. #43–03R6–9–360. Missoula, MT: USDA Forest Service, Lolo National Forest. Butler, B.W.; Bartlette, R.A.; Bradshaw, L.S.; Cohen, J.D.; Andrews, P.L.; Putnam, T.; Mangan, R.J. 1998. Fire behavior associ- ated with the 1994 South Canyon Fire on Storm King Mountain, Colorado. Res. Pap. RMRS–RP–9. Fort Collin, CO: USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. [http://www.fs.fed.us/rm/pubs/ rmrs_rp09.html] Butler, B.W.; Bartlette, R.A.; Bradshaw, L.S.; Cohen, J.D.; Andrews, P.L.; Putnam, T.; Mangan, R.J.; Brown, H. 2001. The South Canyon Fire revisited: lessons in fire behavior. Fire Management Today. 61(1): 14–20. Carpenter, G.A.; Ewing, D.M.; Thomas, D.; Berglund, A.; Lynch, T.; Croft, B. 2002. Price Canyon Fire entrapment investiga- tion report. Missoula, MTand Price, UT: USDA Forest Service, Technology and Development Program and USDI Bureau of Land Management, Price Field Office. [http://www.fire.blm.gov/textdocuments/ PriceBDY.pdf] Chandler, C.C. 1976. Meteorological needs of fire danger and fire behavior. In: Baker, D.H.; Fosberg, M.A., tech. coords. Proceedings ofthe Fourth National Conference on Fire and Forest Meteorology; 1976 November 16–18; St. Louis, MO. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM–32. Fort Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station: 38–41. Cheney, P.; Sullivan, A. 1997. Grassfires: Fuel, weather and fire behaviour. Collingwood, VIC: Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Publishing: 73–79. Chester, G.S.; Adams, J.L. 1963. Checklist of wildfire observations and checklist of equipment for wildfire observation. Mimeo. Rep. 63–MS–19. Winnipeg, MB: Canada Department of Forestry, Forest Research Branch. Christenson, D.A. 2003. Personal written communication. Assistant Manager, Wildland Fire Lessons Learned Center, USDA Forest Service, Marana, AZ. Countryman, C.M. 1969. Useof air tankers pays off—A case study. Res. Note PSW–188. Berkeley, CA: USDA Forest Service, Pacific Southwest Forest and Range Experiment Station. Countryman, C.M. 1972. The fire environ- ment concept. Berkeley, CA: USDA Forest Service, Pacific Southwest Forest and Range Experiment Station.
Countryman, C.M.; Fosberg, M.A.; Rothermel, R.C.; Schroeder, M.J. 1968. Fire weather and behavior ofthe 1966 Loop Fire. Fire Technology. 4: 126–141. Countryman, C.M.; McCutchan, M.H.; Ryan, B.C. 1969. Fire weather and fire behavior atthe 1968 Canyon Fire. Res. Pap. PSW–55. Berkeley, CA: USDA Forest Service, Pacific Southwest Forest and Range Experiment Station. Cruz, M.G., Viegas, D.X. 1997. Arrábida wildfire: Analysis of critical fire weather conditions. Silva Lusitana. 5(2): 209–223. DeCoste, J.H.; Wade, D.D.; Deeming, J.E. 1968. The Gaston Fire. Res. Pap. SE–43. Asheville, NC: USDA Forest Service, Southeastern Forest Experiment Station. Dentoni, M.C.; Defosse, G.E.; Labraga, J.C.; del Valle, H.F. 2001. Atmospheric and fuel conditions related tothe Puerto Madryn Fire of21 January, 1994. Meteorological Applications 8: 361–370. Dibble, D.L. 1960. Fireclimate survey trail- er. Fire Control Notes. 21(4): 16–20. Donoghue, L.R. 1982. The history and reli- ability ofthe USDA Forest Service wild- fire report. Res. Pap. NC–226. St. Paul, MN: USDA Forest Service, North Central Forest Experiment Station. Fogarty, L.G. 1996. Two rural/urban inter- face fires inthe Wellington suburb of Karori: Assessment of burning conditions and fire control strategies. FRI Bull. No. 197, For. Rural Fire Sci. Tech. Ser. Rep. No. 1. Rotorua and Wellington, NZ: New Zealand Forest Research Institute and National Rural Fire Authority. [http://www/forestresearch.co.nz/fire] Geddes, D.J.; Pfeiffer, E.R. 1981. The Caroline Forest fire, 2nd February 1979. Bull. 26. Adelaide, SA: South Australia Woods and Forests Department. Goens, D.A.; Andrews, P.L. 1998. Weather and fire behavior factors related tothe 1990 Dude Fire near Payson, AZ. In: Preprint Volume, Second Symposium on Fire and Forest Meteorology; 1998 January 11–16; Phoenix, AZ: Boston, MA: American Meteorological Society: 153–158. Graham, R.T., tech. ed. 2003a. Hayman Fire case study. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR- 114. Fort Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. Graham, R.T., tech. ed. 2003b. Hayman Fire case study: Summary. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-115. Fort Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. Haines, D.A.; Main, W.A.; Simard, A.J. 1985. Operational validation ofthe National Fire-Danger Rating System inthe Northeast. In: Donoghue, L.R.; Martin, R.E., eds. Proceedings ofthe Eighth Conference on Fire and Forest Meteorology. 1985 April 29–May2; Detroit, MI: SAF Publ. 85–04. Bethesda, MD: Society of American Foresters: 169–177. Jemison, G.M. 1934. Beaufort scale of wind force as adapted for use on forested areas ofthe Northern Rocky Mountains. Journal of Agricultural Research. 49: 77–82. Keeves, A.; Douglas, D.R. 1983. Forest fires in South Australia on16 February 1983 and consequent future forest manage- ment aims. Australian Forestry. 46: 148–162. Kiil, A.D.; Grigel, J.E. 1969. The May 1968 forest conflagrations in central Alberta – a review of fire weather, fuels and fire behavior. Inf. Rep. A–X–24. Calgary, AB: Canada Department of Fisheries and Forestry, Forest Research Laboratory. Lawson, B.D. 1975. Forest fire spread and energy output determined from low alti- tude infrared imagery. In: Proceedings of Symposium on Remote Sensing and Photo Interpretation—International Society for Photogrammetry Commission VII, Volume I; 1974 October 7–11; Banff, AB. Ottawa, ON: Canadian Institute of Surveying: 363–378. List, R.J. 1951. Smithsonian meteorological tables. 6th rev. ed. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institute Press: 119. Luke, R.H.; McArthur, A.G. 1978. Bushfires in Australia. Canberra, ACT: Australian Government Publishing Service: 214. McAlpine, R.S.; Stocks, B.J.; Van Wagner, C.E.; Lawson, B.D.; Alexander, M.E.; Lynham, T.J. 1990. Forest fire behavior research in Canada. In: Proceedings ofthe International Conference on Forest Fire Research; 1990 November 19–22; Coimbra, Portugal: Coimbra, Portugal: University of Coimbra: A02:1–12. McArthur, A.G.; Cheney, N.P.; Barber, J. 1982. The fires of12 February 1977 inthe Western District of Victoria. Canberra, ACT and Melbourne, VIC: Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation, Division of Forest Research and Country Fire Authority. McArthur, A.G.; Douglas, D.R.; Mitchell, L.R. 1966. The Wandilo Fire, 5 April 1958 – fire behaviour and associated meteoro- logical and fuel conditions. Leafl. No. 98. Canberra, ACT: Commonwealth of Australia, Forest and Timber Bureau, Forest Research Institute. Mottus, B. 2002. Duffield wildfire behavior and review of April 24 2001 fire in Parkland County in west-central Alberta. Edmonton, AB: Canadian Forest Service, Northern Forestry Centre. NFES (National Fire Equipment System). 2003. NWCG National Fire Equipment System catalog part 2: publications. Pub. NFES 3362. Boise, ID: National Wildfire Coordinating Group (NWCG). NFPA (National Fire Protection Association). 1990. Black Tiger Fire case study. Quincy, MA: NFPA. [Reprinted as: National Fire Equipment System Publication NFES 2130 bythe National Wildfire Coordinating Group, Boise, ID.] NFPA (National Fire Protection Association). 1991. Stephan Bridge Road Fire case study. Quincy, MA: NFPA. [Reprinted as: National Fire Equipment System Publication NFES 2176 bythe National Wildfire Coordinating Group, Boise, ID.] NFPA (National Fire Protection Association). 1992a. Firestorm ’91 case study. Quincy, MA: NFPA. NFPA (National Fire Protection Associa- tion). 1992b. The Oakland/Berkeley Hills Fire. Quincy, MA: NFPA. Ogilvie, C.J.; Lieskovsky, R.J.; Young, R.W.; Jaap, G. 1995. An evaluation of forward- looking infrared equipped air attack. Fire Management Notes. 55(1): 17–20. Pearce, G.; Anderson, S. 2002. Wildfire doc- umentation: The need for case studies illustrated using the example of “The Atawhai Fire of7 May 2002: A case study. “Fire Tech. Trans. Note 2.6. Christchurch, NZ: New Zealand Forest Research, Forest and Rural Fire Research Programme. [http://www.forestresearch. co.nz/five]. Pearce, H.G.; Morgan, R.F.; Alexander, M.E. 1994. Wildfire behaviour case study ofthe 1986 Awarua wetlands fire. Fire Technol. Transfer Note No. 5. Rotorua and Wellingon, NZ: New Zealand Forest Research Institute and National Rural Fire Authority. [http://www/forestresearch.co.nz/fire] Pirsko, A.R.; Sergius, L.M.; Hickerson, C.W. 1965. Causes and behavior ofa tornadic fire-whirlwind. Res. Note PSW–61. Berkeley, CA: USDA Forest Service, Pacific Southwest Forest and Range Experiment Station. Prior, K.W. 1958. The Balmoral Forest Fire. New Zealand Journal of Forestry. 7(5): 35–50. Rassmusen, J.H.; Fogarty, L.G. 1997. A case study of grassland fire behaviour and suppression: the Tikokino Fire of31 January 1991. FRI Bull. No. 197, For. Rural Fire Sci. Tech. Ser. Rep. No. 2. Rotorua and Wellington, NZ: New Zealand Forest Research Institute and National Rural Fire Authority. [http://www/forestresearch.co.nz/fire] Rothermel, R.C.; Rinehart, G.C. 1983. Field procedures for verification and adjust- ment of fire behavior predictions. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT–142. Ogden, UT: USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. [Reprinted as: National Fire Equipment System Publication NFES 2183 bythe National Wildfire Coordinating Group, Boise, ID.]
Rothermel, R.C.; Hartford, R.A. 1992. Fire behavior data collection request. Unpubl. Rep. Missoula, MT: USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station, Intermountain Fire Sciences Laboratory. Sando, R.W.; Haines, D.A. 1972. Fire weath- erand fire behavior onthe Little Sioux Fire. Res. Pap. NC–76. St. Paul, MN: USDA Forest Service, North Central Forest Experiment Station. Schaefer, V.J. 1959. Useof the60-second- print camera for stereophotography of project fires and related activities. Fire Control Notes. 20: 89–90. Schaefer, V.J. 1961. Better quantitative observations of atmospheric phenomena in going fires. In: Proceedings, Society of American Foresters Meeting; 1960 November 13–16 ; Washington, DC. Washington, DC: Society of American Foresters: 120–124. Simard, A.J.; Haines, D.A.; Blank, R.W.; Frost, J.S. 1983. The Mack Lake Fire. Gen. Tech. Rep. NC–83. St. Paul, MN: USDA Forest Service, North Central Forest Experiment Station. [Reprinted as: National Fire Equipment System Publication NFES 2167 bythe National Wildfire Coordinating Group, Boise, ID.] Stocks, B.J. 1988. Forest fire close to home: Terrace Bay Fire #7/86. In: Fischer, W.C.; Arno, S.F., comps. Protecting People and Homes From Wildfire inthe Interior West: Proceedings ofthe Symposium and Workshop; 1987 October 6–8; Missoula, MT: Gen. Tech. Rep. INT–251. Ogden, UT: USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station: 189–193. Sutton, M.W. 1984. Extraordinary flame heights observed in pine tree fires on16 February 1983. Australian Forestry. 47: 199–200. Taylor, D.F.; Williams, D.T. 1968. Severe storm features ofa wildfire. Agricultural Meteorology. 5: 311–318. Thomas, D. 1994. A case for fire behavior case studies. Wildfire. 3(3): 45, 47. Tolhurst, K.G.; Chatto, K. 1998. Behaviour and threat ofa plume-driven bushfire in west-central Victoria, Australia. In: Weber, R., chair. Proceedings 13th Conference on Fire and Forest Meteorology, Lorne, Australia, Volume 2; 1996 October 27–31; Lorne, VIC: Moran, WY: International Association of Wildland Fire: 321–331. Turner, J.A.; Lillywhite, J.W.; Pieslak, Z. 1961. Forecasting for forest fire services. Tech. Note No. 42. Geneva, Switzerland: World Meteorological Organization: 12. Underwood, S. 1993. Fire aftermath: A county deals with citizen and corporate complaints. In: Wallace, G., ed. 1992 Symposium and Workshop Proceedings: The Power of Politics, the Media and the Public to Affect Wildland/Urban Fire Protection Programs inthe 1990’s; 1992 April 21–25; Missoula, MT: Missoula, MT: National Wildfire Foundation: 43–46. Underwood, R.J.; Sneeuwjagt, R.J., Styles, H.G. 1985. The contribution ofpre- scribed burning to forest fire control in Western Australia: Case studies. In: Ford, J.R., ed. Proceedings ofthe Symposium on Fire Ecology and Management of Western Australian Ecosystems; 1985 May10-11; Perth, WA. WAIT Environ. Stud. Group Rep. No. 14. Perth, WA: Western Australia Institute of Technology: 153–170. USDA Forest Service. 1960. The “Pungo 1959” Fire—A case study. In: Annual Report, 1959. Asheville, NC: USDA Forest Service, Southeastern Forest Experiment Station: 39–42. Van Wagner, C.E. 1965. Story ofan intense crown fire at Petawawa. Pulp and Paper Magazine of Canada 66: WR358–WR361. Wade, D.D.; Ward, D.E. 1973. An analysis ofthe Air Force Bomb Range Fire. Res. Pap. SE–105. Asheville, NC: USDA Forest Service, Southeastern Forest Experiment Station. Walker, J.D.; Stocks, B.J. 1972. Analysis oftwo 1971 wildfires in Ontario: Thackeray and Whistle Lake. Inf. Rep. O–X–166. Sault Ste. Marie, ON: Canadian Forestry Service, Great Lakes Forest Research Centre. Warren, J.R.; Vance, D.L. 1981. Remote automatic weather station for resource and fire management. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT–116. Ogden, UT: USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. ■
HE AROLINA LOWUP Keith A. Argow April 1, 1966, was not aday for April Fool jokes inthe coastal pinelands of North and South Carolina. Itwas an explosive fire day unrivaled in recent times. In those hot24 hours, 72,000 acres (29,000ha) inthe two States were burned, 3,000 acres (1,200ha) per hour. Itwas a Black Friday for more than 50 families whose homes were destroyed. A news release from the South Carolina State Forester’s office in Columbia summed upthe situa- tion: “The driest March inten years created the forest fire danger that exploded on Friday, April 1st, into an almost uncontrollable situation. In three days, Friday, Saturday, and Sunday, 480 wildfires burned 70,000 acres (28,000ha) bringing the total; fire loss since July 1965 to4,800 wildfires burning 120,000 acres (48,000ha) of woodland. This was the greatest loss in11 years. Before the rains came on April 4, the forest area burned inthe two Carolinas during this explosive period reached 144,000 acres (58,000ha). The largest fires were inthe coastal pinelands, but damage was not limited to that area as numerous fires sprang up across the Piedmont. The conflagration came asno real surprise to forest protection per- sonnel. A very dry March had fol- lowed adry winter. On March 30, a meteorologist from theU.S. Forest Service’s South- eastern Forest Fire Laboratory in Macon, Ga., telephoned the State forestry headquarters in Raleigh, N.C., and Columbia, outlining the full danger ofthe unstable weather conditions. Wind and pressure pat- terns such as these had come tothe South before. They usually meant trouble on going fires. The North Carolina State Forester immediately cancelled all burning permits and prohibited useof fire near woods. Yet even with this pre- ventive measure, fire crews inthe Tarheel State fought 273 wildfires covering 18,000 acres (7,200ha) onthe last 2 days of March. In South Carolina onthe same day, the Forestry Commission closed all State parks to public use. Onthe evening of March 31, the governor issued a proclamation prohibiting the use of fire adjacent to wood- lands—the first time this had ever been done. (The authority was pro- vided ina law passed after the dis- astrous 1954-55 fire season, when 7,000 fires burned 159,000 acres (64,000ha).) April 1 April 1 dawned clear and windy. The10 a.m. report from Jones Lake tower on North Carolina’s Bladen Lakes State Forest showed a high spread index, fuel moisture of6 percent, anda steady wind of18 miles per hour (29km/h) from the southwest. By early afternoon rural residents and travelers inthe Carolinas knew there wasa serious fire situation. They didn’t have tobe told over the radio orsee itin the news. They could smell the smoke and feel it burn their eyes. The steady southwest winds were flowing between two areas of high pressure. Oneof the systems had recently passed out into the Atlantic. The second, a fast-moving cold front, was coming in from the Mississippi Valley. At7 a.m. the leading edge was over the Great Smoky Mountains. By1 p.m. itwas inthe Piedmont crossing over Charlotte and Winston-Salem. That evening it reached the Atlantic coast, bringing thunderstorms to Wilmington, N.C. Asthe front hit, prevailing winds were pushed eastward bythe strong winds within the system. This meant a90-degree wind change asit passed. Fires that had made a narrow runto the northeast quick- ly turned southeast, their long flanks becoming new wide heads. The Ammon Fire Oneof the blazes that got the most publicity threatened the little town of Ammon, N.C., for2 days and blackened 17,000 acres (6,900ha) around it. The smoke was first reported at1:30p.m. on April 1. Rumor was that someone had been burning offan area to improve duck hunting, butno one was quite sure whoit was. Itwas a Black Friday for more than 50 families whose homes were destroyed. * The article is reprinted from Fire Control Notes28(1) [Winter 1967]: 3, 15. When this article was originally published, Keith Argow wasan instructor inthe School of Forestry at North Carolina State College, Raleigh, NC.
Forty minutes later a forestry truck on patrol radioed that a second fire was coming outto the highway from nearby Black Lake. Crews just completing control lines onthe White Oak fire only 15 miles (24km) away rushed to both new blazes. Reconnaissance aircraft swung over from the large Newton Crossroads fire a scant 20 miles (32km) east- ward and advised ground crews onthe course ofthe flames and the best control action. The fire towers, now nearly all socked inby smoke, relayed urgent radio messages between headquar- ters and the menon the firelines. “Fire reported across from Melvin’s store.” “Fire has jumped the South River into Sampson County.” “Fire burning two homes anda half- dozen farm buildings on Beaver Dam Church Road.” Fire was every- where! By3 p.m. the Ammon fire had jumped Cedar Creek Road and was headed toward the settlements. The district dispatcher reluctantly pulled a unit off the Black Lake fire, now only 10 miles (16km) away, and committed his last reserve tractor plow. Still the flames continued their advance. Air tankers ofthe North Carolina Forest Service cooled hot spots and were credited with help- ing volunteer fire companies save several homes and outbuildings. Evening came with a smoky orange light. Down inthe swamp the fire rumbled. The cane went up with a crackle that sounded like a rifle platoon in action. The cold front hit the Ammon fire at7 p.m. As expected, the flames changed direction. Already the Whiteville District Forester was headed toward N.C. Highway 242 which now lay in front ofthe fire. Control was impossible now, buthe wanted tobe sure everyone was out ofthe way. Flame—150 Feet High Smoke was intense. The fire could be heard inthe distance, and the glow ofthe flames appeared through the forest. The pines across the highway exploded into what he described asa sheet of flame 150 feet (45m) high. Simultaneously, three lightning bolts from the thunderheads over- head accompanying the cold front struck the main fire. As rapidly asit came, the fire moved on, throwing burning limbs and brands 1,000 feet (300m) ahead ofit. Finally, the skies opened up with a brief down- pour that knocked the flames outof the trees until there was nothing but flickering snags inthe night. Tractor units spent the night plow- ing lines, but without the flames to guide them itwas hard to locate the leading edges inthe dark. The situation was made more difficult bythe many small spot fires that were scattered out ahead asfar asa quarter ofa mile (0.4km). The thundershower was only tem- porary relief. Severe burning condi- tions were forecast for the next day. Again and again crews sought to strengthen their plowlines, but the backfires would not burn. Without fire, they were unable to construct a fire-break wide enough to hold anew onslaught. As expected, a drying wind came up with the sun on April 2. Bymid- morning the scattered embers were fanned to life. Crews worked in vain. Flames were rolling again and took little notice ofthe lines that had been plowed across their path. The Ammon fire had places togo and another 10,000 acres (4,000ha) to burn before a general rain anda massive control effort would contain it2 days later. Yes, April 1, 1966, will be long remembered inthe Carolina pinelands. But the severe test was well metby courageous firecrews and modern equipment. By early afternoon rural residents and travelers inthe Carolinas knew there wasa serious fire situation.
During the more critical fire seasons there always seems tobe oneor more days that stand outas “black days.” On these days fires burn hotter and are harder to control than on other days. Fires blow upon “black days.” Like Black Wednesday, April 8, 1970, in Arkansas and eastern Oklahoma. Fire Season The fire season in both states usu- ally ends in late April. Normally by this time, vegetation is turning green. Fire control agencies are shifting to other forestry opera- tions, and seasonal fire control crews are leaving. But April 1970 was unusual. Rain fell in above-normal amounts during the early spring months. Periods of rain were so spaced that all fuels, except the fine ones, remained wet. Temperatures remained well below the seasonal normal keeping the vegetation inthe cured stage. Except fora few border stations, fire danger sta- tions did not go into the transition stage until mid-April. Rainfall, that had been coming in substantial amounts, dropped offin late March to almost nothing. This dry spell continued into mid-April and tem- peratures started rising to more normal levels. This was just the type of weather the people were * The article is reprinted from Fire Control Notes32(1) [Winter 1971]: 16, 15. When this article was originally published, Rollo Davis and Richard Ogden were forestry meteorologists for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, National Weather Service in Oklahoma City, OK, and Little Rock, AR. waiting for: to begin field clearing by burning, brush pile burning, and garden and household debris burning. During this period, a great number of fires roared outof control. Synoptic Situation and the Black Wednesday Forecast The dry spell, begun in late March, stretched into April asdry, high pressure spread over Oklahoma and Arkansas. It blocked frontal systems from the area. By April 7, high pressure extended upward to20,000 feet (6,100m), but the sur- face high center had moved tothe lower Mississippi Valley. Moderate- to-strong, southwesterly, low-level winds pumped even drier air over Arkansas and Oklahoma. Afternoon relative humidities dropped tothe 20-percent level, and some places had humidity readings down inthe ’teens. With fuels already bone-dry, an extremely dangerous fire situa- tion wasin the making. Fires bythe hundreds were being reported in Arkansas and Oklahoma. But most of them were not too difficult to control. Wednesday morning, April 8, another dangerous weather feature entered the weather picture. The6 a.m. radiosonde observations at Oklahoma City and Little Rock showed the air tobe conditionally unstable to about 15,000 feet (4,800m). It would become absolutely unstable from the sur- face upto 4,000 feet (1,200m) bythe middle ofthe afternoon. Widespread surface whirlwinds or dust devils resulted from the great instability inthe lower 1,500 feet (460m). Warnings were called tothe State Fire Control Chiefs, as well asto the Ozark and Ouachita National Forests. The warnings were for potential blow-up condi- tions. Hard-to-control fire behavior such as rapid crowning, long-dis- tance spotting, and large convec- tion columns was expected. What Happened All conditions were favorable for fires in Oklahoma and Arkansas. There wasa significant deficiency in rainfall during the last half of March and the first half of April. There had been an extended period of extremely low relative humidi- ties. When these conditions com- bined with an unstable atmos- phere, all conditions were “go” for blow-up fires. And blow-up fires did occur. At9 p.m. that Black Wednesday evening the Ouachita National Forest called to report oneof their worst fires in3 years had been With fuels already bone-dry, an extremely danger- ous fire situation wasin the making. Fires bythe hundreds were being reported in Arkansas and Oklahoma. LACK EDNESDAY IN RKANSAS ANDO KLAHOMA * Rollo T. Davis and Richard M. Ogden
burning outof control. Aerial tankers, as well as hand crews, had been ineffective against this fire. The Oklahoma Division of Forestry reported a total of35 fires that burned 7,669 acres (3,103ha), while one fire roared over 2,080 acres (841ha). Arkansas (State and National Forests) hada total of142 fires which burned 12,559 acres (5,082ha). Air Stability the Key When fire weather conditions are conducive to many fires (i.e. large precipitation deficiency, and low relative humidities) the fire weath- er meteorologist gives special attention tothe stability ofthe atmosphere. The key to identifying this situation is interpretation ofthe early morning radiosonde observation, including tempera- ture, humidity, and wind from the ground upward, thousands of feet. The fire control agency, informed of dangerously unstable atmospher- ic conditions bythe fire weather meteorologist, is warned to expect erratic fire behavior. ■ The key to identifying the stability ofthe atmosphere is interpretation ofthe early morning radiosonde observation, including temperature, humidity, and wind from the ground upward.
ET TREAM NFLUENCE ONTHE ILLOW FIRE * John H. Dieterich On June 13–17, 1956, the Dudley Lake Fire burned 21,389 acres (8,555ha) onthe Chevelon Ranger District ofthe Sitgreaves National Forest in Arizona. Nineteen years later, on June 17–19, 1975, the Willow Fire, burning onthe same ranger dis- trict and under remarkably similar conditions of fuel, weather, and topography, burned 2,850 acres (1,140ha). Following the Dudley Lake Fire, Vincent Schaefer, writing inthe Journal of Forestry (Vol. 55, No. 6, June 1957), summarized the rela- tionship between the jet stream and23 large fires inthe West dur- ing the 1955 and 1956 fire seasons. His article was prompted in part bythe unusual fire behavior observed onthe Dudley Lake Fire, andin part byhis interest inthe jet stream asa dominant factor inthe behavior of these problem fires. Aswe began toput together the story ofthe Willow Fire, it became apparent that here was another case that could be added to Schaefer’s list of destructive fires that burned under the influence ofthe jet stream. While there were some rather obvious differences between the two fires—the most important being in area burned— there were a sufficient number of * The article is reprinted from Fire Management Notes 37(2) [Spring 1976]: 6–8. When this article was originally published, John Dieterich wasa research forester for the USDA Forest Service, Forest Hydrology Laboratory, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Tempe, AZ. similarities to make the two fires interesting from a direct compari- son standpoint. Description ofthe Area The locations ofthe Dudley Lake and Willow Fires are shown infig- ure1. Onthe Dudley Lake Fire, 18 percent ofthe area wasin pri- vate holdings (Aztec Land Co.) while onthe Willow Fire, 41per- cent ofthe area burned was being managed, at least in part, by Southwest Forest Industries. The Forest Service, however, provides fire protection for these lands within the protection boundaries. Both fires were man-caused, and both occurred in terrain typical ofthe Mogollon Rim country—a flat The weather pattern onthe two fires, particularly with regard tothe jet stream, appeared to have been generated under nearly identical conditions. Aerial view of wind-driven smoke column from the Dudley Lake Fire, June 14, 1956. The smoke column remained remarkably intact for several miles downward and was still readily identifiable inthe vicinity of Mesa Verde National Park, 210 miles (340km) tothe northeast.
to rolling landform bisected by steep rocky canyons. (The Willow Fire quartered across Willow Creek Canyon, while the Dudley Lake Fire crossed several smaller canyons.) Fuels The fuels appeared tobe remark- ably similar on both fires. Since both public and private land own- ership were involved, fuel treat- ment standards varied from little orno fuel treatment to nearly com- plete treatment of slash after log- ging. Estimates of fuel weights were not available for the Dudley Lake Fire, buta detailed fuel inven- tory onthe Willow Fire indicated that fuel loading, including litter, varied from 18 tons per acre (40,353kg/ha) onthe lighter areas to about 54 tons per acre (121,060kg/ha) where slash remained untreated after heavy cutting. Even on areas where slash disposal had been fairly complete, sufficient ground and surface fuels had accu- mulated to support an intense fire, influenced bylow relative humidi- ties and fuel moistures andby strong winds. Weather Both fires burned during the mid- dleof June—generally considered tobe the most critical period of fire weather inthe Mogollon Rim country. The weather pattern onthe two fires, particularly with regard tothe jet stream, appeared to have been generated under near- ly identical conditions. As indicated bythe weather data, the tempera- ture and relative humidity condi- tions were notas critical onthe Willow Fire, but the wind condi- tions were nearly identical. One obvious difference between the two fires wasin the length of time the severe burning conditions per- sisted. Onthe Dudley Lake Fire, the strong winds continued and the relative humidities remained low for nearly 72 hours. Onthe Willow Fire, the critical burning period was over in about 36 hours. An inspection ofthe 500-millibar weather map for the Willow Fire indicated that, indeed, the jet stream conditions persisted over the fire for about 36 hours. Then the winds dropped and humidities began to rise. Two other Class E fires started and burned inNew Mexico during the same 3- to4-day period asthe Willow Fire. These fires were undoubtedly influenced bythe same strong winds that were pass- ing over the Willow Fire. Fire Intensity Maximum fire intensities were esti- mated for the Dudley Lake and Willow Fires using Byram’s formu- la (Byram 1959). Fire intensity on Forecasting unusually strong surface winds is perhaps the most important single activity for the fire weather forecaster. Figure 1—Location ofthe Dudley Lake and Willow Fires onthe Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest.
the Dudley Lake Fire was estimated at15,300 Btu/s/ft (126,378 cal/s/cm) andon the Willow Fire at12,750 Btu/s/ft (105,315 cal/s/cm). The difference between these two was not sufficient to explain the difference inthe final size ofthe two fires. More important isthe fact that the Dudley Lake Fire burned asa high-intensity fire for nearly twice as long asthe Willow Fire. Byway of comparison, the Sundance Fire in northern Idaho— considered a very high intensity fire—yielded an estimated maxi- mum intensity of22,500 Btu/s/ft (185,850 cal/s/cm) during its maxi- mum run. Fire Suppression Load There wasa considerable difference between the fire load being experi- enced bythe Forest Service’s Southwestern Region in 1956 and the number of fires burning when the Willow Fire broke out. During the12-day period from June 8to June 20in 1956, eight Class E fires in addition tothe Dudley Lake Fire were controlled orin the process of being controlled. Over 90,000 acres (36,000ha) burned in Arizona in 1956—nearly three times the run- ning 5-year average of32,600 acres (13,040ha). During the Willow Fire the Region wasn’t experiencing this type of fire load; in fact, the Willow Fire was the first big fire ofany conse- quence inthe Region in 1975. Over 1,100 men were used onthe Willow Fire, while only 750 men were employed onthe Dudley Lake Fire, even though itwas several times larger. Fire suppression costs onthe Willow Fire were estimated at nearly $700,000, four times the suppression costs onthe Dudley Lake Fire ($175,000). The per-acre suppression costs were about 30 times as high onthe Willow Fire ($245.61) as they were onthe Dudley Lake Fire ($8.18)—a fact that shouldn’t surprise anyone. There were some interesting simi- larities inthe fire suppression measures taken onthe two fires. Onthe Dudley Lake Fire, only hand crews and heavy equipment were used because, in 1955 and 1956, aircraft were just beginning tobe tested for dropping water on fires. Onthe Willow Fire, most ofthe suppression effort also came from hand crews and heavy equipment because the winds were so strong that aircraft use was limited tothe early morning hours. Lessons Learned In summary, the following facts are evident: • First, forecasting unusually strong surface winds, especially those that are associated with the jet stream or abrupt changes in pressure patterns, is perhaps the most important single activity for the fire weather forecaster. Forecasting units may currently be doing this operationally, but additional “red flag” emphasis should be given to these situa- tions when they occur. • Second, when fires start under these severe wind conditions, orif fires that are burning come under the influence of winds over 30 miles per hour (48km/h), the chances are good that they will continue to spread until the weather changes, or until they run out of fuel. • Finally, by current fuel treatment standards, even our best efforts at fuel reduction donot appear tobe adequate to provide much assistance inthe control of high- intensity wind-driven fires such asthe Dudley Lake and Willow Fires. If fuel treatment isthe answer, it will need tobe done ona level that isfar more extensive (area) and intensive (fuel reduc- tion) than weare now accom- plishing—even onour best fuel breaks. Reference Byram, G.M. 1959. Combustion of forest fuels. In: Davis, K.P., ed. Forest fires: Control and use. New York, NY: McGraw- Hill, Inc.: 61–89. ■ By current fuel treatment standards, even our best efforts at fuel reduction donot appear to provide much assistance inthe control of high-intensity wind-driven fires.
REDICTING AJOR ILDLAND IREO CCURRENCE * Edward A. Brotak and William E. Reifsnyder During a drought period when the build-up index is very high, wildfires are common. On some days, these small fires quickly get out of hand, and some become major fires. Obviously, any forecasting method which could determine when these major fires were likely to occur would be most useful. The following details such a predictive scheme from readily available weather maps. No calcu- lations are necessary, just recogni- tion of certain clearly defined situ- ations. Using Weather Maps The original data analyzed consist- edof 52 fires, each burning 5,000 acres (2,000ha) or more, inthe Eastern United States from 1963 to 1973 (see fig. 1). Of particular con- cern were major fire runs, periods of time when the fire was probably uncontrollable dueto the prevail- ing weather conditions. Figure 2is an idealized surface map showing where these major fire runs oc- curred in relation tothe existing fronts and high and low pressure areas. Certain regions were obvi- ously prone to large fires. The region immediately behind adry cold front isthe most danger- ous. Strong, shifting winds are the apparent cause. Strong southerly winds ahead ofthe cold front can also cause control difficulties. Obviously, if significant precipita- tion occurs with the frontal pas- sage, fire danger will notbe great. Another region of great danger isthe warm sector ofa strong low pressure area (as indicated bythe cluster of runs tothe east–south- east ofthe lowin figure 2). There were two different types oflow pressure areas involved with major fires. One was the Rocky Mountain low which produced dangerous fire conditions inthe Plains and Mid- western States. The other kind oflow wasa storm which moved east- erly through southern Canada pro- ducing dangerous fire conditions inthe Great Lakes States andin northern New England. Major lows inthe Eastern United States are almost always accompanied bypre- cipitation. If only the surface maps are avail- able, then these dangerous situa- tions can only be distinguished from other similar situations bya closer examination ofthe map. Dangerous frontal situations will be characterized by strong winds, a tight pressure gradient, and little orno precipitation with the frontal passage. Figure 1—Locations ofall fires. * The article is reprinted from Fire Management Notes 38(2) [Spring 1977]: 5–8. Itis based onA Synoptic Study ofthe Meteorological Conditions Associated With Major Wildland Fires,E.A. Brotak’sPh.D. dissertationat the Yale School of Forestry and Environmental Studies. When this article was originally published, E.A. Brotak wasa research assistant andW.E. Reifsnyder wasa professor of forest meteorology atthe Yale School of Forestry and Environmental Studies, New Haven, CT.
Dangerous frontal situations will be characterized by strong winds, a tight pressure gradient, and little orno precipitation with the frontal passage. Dangerous conditions around low pressure areas usually depend on precipitation occur- rence. Ifthe upper air maps are available, these dangerous situations are much easier to determine. Strong cold fronts are distinguished from weaker fronts bythe presence of intense upper level troughs, readily apparent atthe 500-millibar (~18,100 feet [~5,500m]) level. The intensity of these troughs is determined bythe radius of curva- ture which was usually 400 miles (640km) or less for the study fires. Figure 3 shows that the most dan- gerous conditions are associated with the southeastern portion ofthe trough. The likelihood of precipitation is best determined from the 850-mil- libar (~4,900 feet [~1,500m]) map. Significant moisture advection at this level in conjunction with an upper trough usually produces pre- cipitation. Only ifthe dewpoint depression ofthe airat this level upwind ofan area is41 ºF (5ºC) or more is precipitation unlikely and major fire occurrence possible. Fortunately, the development of major low pressure areas and the passage of strong cold fronts are normally associated with precipita- tion. Itis on those rare occasions when precipitation does not accom- pany these systems and fuel condi- tions are severe that major fire occurrence is likely. Using Local Wind and Temperature Profiles The preceding section describes the use of readily available weather maps for the routine prediction of major wildland fires. In this sec- tion, we shall describe howto use local wind and temperature profiles to determine dangerous fire condi- tions. For all 52 fires, wind and temperature data from the surface to10,000 feet (3,050m) were plot- ted and analyzed for one ortwo nearby first order weather stations for times just before and just after the fire’srun. From these data, characteristic profiles were deter- Figure 2—Idealized surface map showing locations ofall fire runs. (CFA = following cold frontal passage; CFB = preceding cold frontal passage; WSL = warm sector oflow; andWS = warm sector of high.) Fortunately, the development of major low pressure areas and the passage of strong cold fronts are normally associated with precipitation. Figure 3—Idealized 500-millibar map showing locations ofall fire runs.
mined which could be used aspre- dictive models. Strong surface winds area prereq- uisite condition for major wildland fires. However, an examination of only the surface winds isnot ade- quate for predictive purposes. Observed surface winds are not always representative of actual con- ditions. This is especially true inthe morning when the nocturnal inversion often produces weak sur- face winds. Ifthe winds above the inversion layer are strong, the potential for strong surface winds inthe afternoon is great. Topo- graphic effects can also produce seemingly low surface wind speeds, but again ifthe wind speeds above the surface are high, strong gusts canbe expected atthe surface. A wind profile characteristic of most major fire situations is shown in figure 4. Surface wind speeds always reached 15 miles per hour (24km/h) and are usually 20 miles per hour (32km/h) or greater. Wind speeds at10,000 feet (3,000m) were almost always 40 miles per hour (64km/h) or greater. The above figures canbe considered as critical values for major fire occur- rence. The association of major wildland fires with low-level jets (wind maxi- ma within 10,000 feet [3,000m] ofthe surface where the wind speed is5 miles per hour [8km/h] greater than a thousand feet [300m] above or below) wasa significant finding of this research. A third ofthe wind profiles showed such ajet. Certain synoptic situations were more favorable for the jet’s occurrence. Most frequent were the prefrontal jets, southerly wind maxima just ahead ofthe surface cold front. Another southerly jet was often noted inthe warm sector ofthe common Rocky Mountain low pres- sure area. A postfrontal jet, a northerly wind maximum behind the surface cold front, occurred ona number of occasions. Low-level jets were also occasionally noted along the East Coast and seemed tobe associated with the sea breeze front. Although nota prerequisite condi- tion, the occurrence ofa low-level jet happens frequently enough, especially under certain patterns, tobe an important factor. If present, the authors believe that the low- level jet will increase surface wind speeds and gustiness by downward transport of momentum. The importance of this, especially onthe worst fire days, is probably to make bad conditions even worse. Ithas long been believed that atmospheric instability was associ- ated with major wildland fires. Inan attempt to determine some characteristic values of this param- eter, certain lapse rates were exam- ined for each fire situation. Using the standard pressure levels given inthe soundings, the lapse rates that were used were 950–850 mil- libar, 850–700 millibar, and 850–500 millibar. Figure 4—Characteristic wind profile. Observed surface winds are not always representative of actual conditions, especially inthe morning, when the nocturnal inversion often produces weak surface winds.
The 950–850 millibar (~2,000 feet to ~5,000 feet [~600to ~1,500m]) temperature (∆T) avoids the vari- ability of surface temperatures and the occurrence of surface based inversions, butis still greatly influ- enced by daily solar heating andis probably a local rather than macroscale parameter. As shown in figure 5, the vast majority of fires, 92 percent, occurred when the lapse rate between these levels was steeper than the standard atmos- phere value (∆T = 6.0ºC). Super- adiabatic lapse rates were noted ona number of fires. Thus a tempera- ture difference ofat least 6.0ºC between the 950 and 850 millibar levels appears tobe a necessary condition for major fire occur- rence. The 850–700 millibar (∆T) depicts the lapse rate between ~5,000 feet (~1,500m) and ~10,000 feet (~3,000m), and the instability at those heights would probably be macroscale. As shown in figure 6, in general, a temperature difference ofat least 10ºC is associated with major fires. This value is close tothe standard atmosphere lapse rate. The15.0ºC to15.9ºC category encompasses the dry adiabatic lapse rate which isthe maximum that could be expected for these heights. The 850–500 millibar (∆T) depicts the lapse rate between ~5,000 feet (~1,500m) and ~18,000 feet (~5,500m). A temperature differ- ence of26 ºCis the standard atmosphere lapse rate. A tempera- ture difference of40 ºCto 41ºC isthe dry adiabatic lapse rate and would be remarkably unstable for Figure 5—950–850 millibar temperature difference for all fire runs. Figure 6—850–700 millibar temperature difference for all fire runs. The occurrence ofa low-level jet happens frequently enough, especially under certain patterns, tobe an important factor in major wildland fires.
this level inthe atmosphere. As shown in figure 7, about 75 percent ofthe fire runs occurred with a temperature difference of26 ºCor more. Acknowledgment The research project summarized here was supported bythe Atmospheric Science Section ofthe National Science Foundation. ■ Figure 7—850–500 millibar temperature difference for all fire runs.
THE BASS R IVER FIRE : W EATHER C ONDITIONS A SSOCIATED WITH AF ATAL FIRE * E.A. Brotak Although wildland fires are fair- ly common inNew Jersey, fatalities directly caused by fire are very rare. However, on July 22, 1977, a fire inthe Bass River State Forest claimed the lives of four vol- unteer firefighters. Since these men were well trained and experi- enced, itis likely the fire exhibited unusual behavior, thus trapping them. This article evaluates possi- ble causes ofthe unusual fire behavior. Setting Traditionally, the Pine Barrens in southern New Jersey are noted for major wildland fires during times of drought. The unusual combina- tion of fuel, soil, and adverse weather conditions produces rapid- ly spreading surface and crown fires. Spread rates of these fires are among the greatest inthe country. Drought conditions were present in southern New Jersey all through the first half of 1977. Atthe Atlantic City National Weather Service, which is representative ofthe Pine Barrens, moisture for the 6-month period was41 percent below normal. By July, New Jersey had experienced oneof its worst spring fire seasons, with nearly 32,000 acres (13,000ha) burned. Summer normally brings green foliage and frequent rains, thus * The article is reprinted from Fire Management Notes 40(1) [Winter 1979]: 10–13. When this article was originally published, E.A. Brotak wasan Assistant Professor of Meteorology at Kean College ofNew Jersey, Union, NJ. Shifting winds and the intensity ofthe fire along the road where the men were trapped made it impossible for them to escape alive. ending the fire season. However, this year, after some rain in June, drought conditions returned in July. A prolonged heat wave occurred from July 13to July 21, with temperatures above 90 °F (32 °C) on every dayat many locations. On July 21, readings above 100 °F (38 °C) were reported at some loca- tions. This produced tinder dry fuels. Bass River Fire The Bass River Fire started at approximately 1500 hours eastern daylight time (EDT) on July 22 near the intersection of Allen and Oswego Roads (fig. 1). The exact cause ofthe fire has not been determined, but arson is suspect- ed. A thick column of black smoke, indicating rapid burning, was spot- tedat 1501 EDTby the lookout tower several miles tothe south. An initial attack group was dis- patched tothe scene. Additional fire equipment was sent at 1525 EDT, so that by 1540 EDT there were nine fire units working the fire. At 1546 EDT, when itwas apparent that the initial attack had failed, all units were ordered outof the fire area. At 1600 EDT, a call was sent outto neighboring volunteer fire compa- nies. They were told to report tothe area and await instructions. A brush truck from the Eagles- wood Fire Company with four men aboard responded tothe call for help. Itis not clear why, but this unit mistakenly proceeded into the fire area. At 1800 EDT, a recon- naissance helicopter spotted the charred truck ona narrow, dirt road between Allen and Coal Roads (fig. 1). At 1815 EDT, a search team located the bodies ofthe four men. Since more accurate infor- mation could notbe obtained, the only estimate was that the men were trapped sometime between 1600 and 1800 EDT. Figure 1—Mapof the Bass River Fire.
The fire itself was not officially con- trolled until 1500 EDT the next day. A total of2,300 acres (930ha) were burned. Most of this occurred inthe 3-hour period from 1500 to 1800 EDTon July 22. Weather Analysis Early onthe morning ofthe July 22, adry cold front pushed across the fire area. Bythe time ofthe fire, the Bass River State Forest wasin the region behind the cold front (fig. 2). This area is noted for major fires inNew Jersey (Brotak 1977). An examination ofthe 500 millibar map (fig. 3) showed New Jersey tobe inthe southeastern portion ofa fairly well developed short wave trough. Again, this isa region noted for strong winds and major fires (Brotak 1977). Surface weath- er observations inthe area (table 1) indicated warm temperature, decreasing humidity, and moderate winds from the north to northwest during the morning. Figure 2—1400 EDT surface weather map. Itis possible that the fire was affected bya sur- face pressure trough, causing pressure falls and changes in wind speed and direction. 0155 09478 66330 09 — 0252 09877 66330 09 — 0353 10276 66330 09 — 0451 10575 66340 10 — 0553 11274 67350 08 — 0651 12075 66350 10 — 0755 12876 65010 11 — 0850 13680 64010 12 — 0951 14282 58010 12 Gusts to20 knots. 1050 14685 53010 11 Gusts to18 knots. 1156 14686 52020 12 — 1254 14686 55010 10 — 1355 14686 51330 12 Gusts to19 knots. 1450 14287 49340 12 Gusts to19 knots. 1551 14087 46350 14 Gusts to24 knots, smoke layer NE. 1655 14685 47330 15 Gusts to21 knots, smoke layer NE-E. 1755 14683 45340 14 Gusts to20 knots, smoke layer NE-E. 1857 15480 46330 12 Smoke layer NE-E. 1955 16277 47340 10 Smoke layer NE-SE. 2057 17370 47330 06 — 2156 18370 48330 08 — 2255 18769 48340 08 — 2355 19367 45340 08 — Table 1—Hourly observations at Atlantic City National Weather Service Office. Winda Remarks Time (EDT) Pressure (milibar) Temperature (°F) Dewpoint (°F) Direction (°) Speed (knots) a. Peak wind at24 knots from the north at 1548 EDT; fastest observed 1-minute wind speed: 17mph from 330°at 1655 EDT.
Fire Behavior An investigation atthe site where the men were trapped indicated two major points. First, from the direction of fire spread, it appears that the wind shifted from the northeast during a part ofthe fire’srun. This is believed tobe responsi- ble for trapping the men. The second point noted was that fire intensity was much greater along this road than inthe sur- rounding burned woods. This would indicate fire storm condi- tions that made it impossible for the mento survive. The idea ofa classic fire blowup is supported by observations ofthe fire and its convective column. The spotter inthe Bass River fire tower noted flames reaching above canopy height which indicates flame heights of perhaps 40or 50 feet (12–15m). An observer afew miles away noted a prominent con- vective column over the Bass River Fire. Itwas described as being “capped bya white, billowy cloud”; a classic cumulus top indicating extreme convection. Although there were other fires inthe area, the observer noted that only this fire hada cumulus top. The convective column had maxi- mum development occurring between 1500 and 1800 EDT, the time of blow-upat the surface. The convective column was also picked upon the Atlantic City radar scope, indicating a height ofat least sever- al thousand feet. Atmospheric Instability Oneof the prime ingredients fora blow-up fire is inherent instability inthe atmosphere. The morning sounding atNew York City (fig. 4) Figure 3—0800 EDT 500 millibar map. Figure 4—0700 EDT New York City temperature sounding. Fire managers must know and understand local weather patterns and variance to maximize the efficiency and safety ofthe suppression job.
showed this inherent instability from the surface to about 6,500 feet (2,000m). The evening sounding (fig. 5), which is probably more representative ofthe conditions during the blow-up, showed extreme instability with a nearly dry adiabatic lapse rate from the surface to6,560 feet (2,000m). High surface temperatures (table 1) added tothe instability. This type of instability probably allowed the convective column over the fire to develop rapidly producing the blow-upat the surface. An examination ofthe evening wind profile atNew York City (fig. 6) showed moderate sustained sur- face wind; certainly strong enough to cause fire control problems. It also indicated constant wind speeds with height toan elevation of6,560 feet (2,000m). According to Byram (1954), this would allow the con- vective column to develop more fully, producing blow-up conditions atthe surface. The cause ofthe wind shift from northwest to northeast was also investigated. Asea breeze was ruled out since conditions were not favorable and such asea breeze was not observed at Atlantic City. The surface map showed no indications other than the fact that winds are known tobe variable behind a cold front. Itis possible the fire itself induced such a flow through indrafts. Pressure Trough However, another possibility exists that was indicated bythe hourly observations at Atlantic City (table 1). The pressure, which had been rising steadily after the frontal pas- sage, fell (from 1400 to 1600 EDT); then began rising again. The tem- perature climbed steadily through- out the day despite the passage ofthe cold front, and after 1600 EDT, began to drop off sharply. During the period from 1600 to 1800 EDT, the wind direction went from northwest to north at Atlantic City with increasing speeds and gusti- ness. The peak gust for the day was from the north at24 knots and occurred at 1548 EDT. Itis possible that the fire was affect- edby a surface pressure trough. Such a trough would cause the noted pressure falls and changes in wind speed and direction. The occurrence ofa surface pressure trough behind a cold front, with the colder air behind it, isnot uncom- monin the east. Such a trough could easily be overlooked inthe synoptic-scale observation network ofthe National Weather Service. The relationship of major fires and surface troughs has also been noted before inthe east (Brotak 1977). Summary In order to avert such tragedies inthe future, the possible causes of blow-ups must be determined and understood. Obviously, very heavy fuel loads and tinder dry conditions are contributing factors. Topo- graphic effects, in this case, have been ruled out, since there was only a very slight slope to this basi- cally flat land. Where the terrain is steeper this could have a major impact. Weather conditions play akey role and are extremely com- plex. Fire managers must know and understand local patterns and vari- ance to maximize the efficiency and safety ofthe suppression job. References Brotak, E.A. 1977. A synoptic study ofthe meteorological conditions associated with major wildland fires. Ph.D. diss. Yale University, New Haven, CT. Byram, G.M. 1954. Atmospheric conditions related to blow-up fires. Pap. No. 35. Asheville, NC: USDA Forest Service, Southeastern Forest Experiment Station. ■ Figure 5—1900 EDT New York City temperature sounding. Figure 6—1900 EDT New York City wind profile.
Itwas Monday, May5, 1980. The skies were clear over the Huron National Forest in northeastern Michigan. The plan for the Crane Lake prescribed burning unit called for the establishment of210 acres (85ha) of habitat favored bythe endangered Kirtland’s warbler. After a final check of weather con- ditions was made, firing started at10:25a.m. There was some “spill- over” as firing progressed, but spot fires had been anticipated and were quickly controlled. Around noon, however, the fire jumped into standing timber and quickly ran east toward Highway 33. When it reached the highway, it torched and then spotted 200 feet (60m) across tothe east side ofthe highway. Thus began the Mack Lake fire. Rapid Spread A tractor-plow unit attacked the escaped fire east ofthe highway within 3 minutes of detection, butto no avail. The fire torched in some reproduction, dropped tothe ground briefly ina patch of mature timber, then crowned ina stand of jack pine saplings just 100 feet (30m) from the highway. The opera- tors ofa 6x 6 tanker unit who caught and passed the tractor later reported that, despite progressing at4 to6 miles per hour (6–10km/hr), they never saw the head ofthe fire. While working the north flank about one-half mile (0.8km) east of Highway 33, the tractor was caught between a crown fire burning northward across its path anda second east-moving crown fire that had crossed the plow line behind the tractor. The operator was trapped and killed inthe fire. At this time, the main fire front was advancing eastward at2 miles per hour (160 chains per hour [3,219m/h]). This partially resulted from spotting at least a quarter ofa mile (0.4km) ahead ofthe fire. One hour after the fire had escaped, walls of flame 30to 50 feet (9–15m) high passed through the town of Mack Lake, 2 miles (3.2km) east ofthe escape. Like so many other large fires, it destroyed many homes while leaving other neigh- boring houses unscathed. Three hours after the fire escaped, ithad advanced 6 miles (10km). During the afternoon ofMay 5th, no amount of line or width of road held or slowed the fire. That after- noon the fire released the energy equivalent of340,000 barrels ofoil, orsix times the energy ofthe Hiroshima atomic bomb. At4:30p.m., a frontal passage brought the usual north wind shift butno rain. By6 p.m., the fire had advanced an additional 3 miles (5km) (about 1-1/4 miles per hour [2km/hr]). Because ofthe wind shift, however, the fire front had expand- ed from 2to 6 miles (3–10km) wide and was now advancing south- ward. At this time, firefighters got their first major break—the fire ran out of jack pine. Although the wind did not diminish during the evening and the nighttime relative humidity did not rise above 55per- cent, the forward rate of advance dropped to about 7 feet per minute (5 chains per hour [101m/h]) asthe fire burned through hardwood stands. By daybreak onMay 6th, major control efforts were underway. In contrast tothe previous day, fire- fighters experienced little difficulty containing the blaze. The perimeter did not change appreciably after May 5th. Environmental Conditions What were the environmental con- ditions that ledto the Mack Lake fire, which took one human life, destroyed or damaged 41 dwellings (including 39 summer homes), and consumed 20,000 acres (8,000ha) of jack pine in less than 6 hours? Weather. There wasno indication of drought condition atthe time ofthe fire. Total precipitation from January 1979 through April 1980 was near normal. Spring fire dan- ger had been erratic. Except for2 When this article was originally published, Albert Simard wasa project leader for fire management planning. USDA Forest Service, North Central Forest Experiment Station, East Lansing, MI. HEACK AKE IRE Albert J. Simard * The article is reprinted from Fire Management Notes 42(2) [Spring 1981]: 5–6. Three hours after the fire escaped, ithad advanced 6 miles andno amount of line or width of road held or slowed the fire.
days of moderate danger, itwas either too wet to burn (14 days) orthe burning index was high to very high (19 days). Although 0.7 inch (0.18cm) of rain fell on April 30th, midafternoon relative humidities onthe 3 days before the fire aver- aged only 23 percent. Asa result, fine fuels had dried completely since the rain. Conditions at2 p.m. onMay 5th were: Temperature, 82 °F (28ºC); windspeed, 18 miles per hour (29km/h) (gusting to25+ [40+ km/h]); and relative humidity, 22 percent. Fuels. The fire made its major runin stands of jack pine that had regenerated after a16,400-acre (6,600-ha) fire that burned the same area in 1946. Although stock- ing density, tree height, and stem diameter varied considerably typi- cal stands contained 1,500 sapling- to pole-size stems per acre, 15to 25 feet (5–6m) tall. Fine surface fuels (duff, grass, ferns, lichen, and shrubs) averaged 10 tons per acre, and scattered larger material and crown foliage averaged an addition- al10 tons per acre. Jack pine foliage moisture wasat the seasonal low (110 percent of oven-dry weight). This is much lower than the post-flush average moisture content and about 30per- cent lower than would be expected in late summer. Low foliar mois- ture probably contributed tothe extreme spread rate ofthe Mack Lake fire, butby itself was probably nota major factor. Surface fuels were inan early transitional stage, but the previous material predomi- nated. Further, because of below normal winter snowfall, the fuels had not been compacted. The fire consumed an average of11 tons of material per acre. Further evidence ofthe lack of drought was that most material larger than 1/2 inch (1.3cm) in diameter was not con- sumed other than inthe piled slash inthe prescribed burn area. Topography. Much ofthe fire area is rolling with numerous small ridges and valleys. Typical slopes average 20 percent, with elevational differences of less than 100 feet (30m). Roads are the only barriers to fire spread inthe terrain. The Lessons of Mack Lake In summary, three key factors con- tributed tothe extreme spread ofthe Mack Lake fire: Relative humid- ityof 22 percent, windspeed of18 miles per hour (29km/h), anda jack pine timber type. These and similar conditions are not rare inthe Northeast. Crown-fire spread rates ranging from 1to 2 miles per hour (2–3km/h) and long-range spotting have been reported previ- ously and will be observed again. Fire managers can learn several important lessons from the Mack Lake Fire: 1. Once a crown fire begins inthe jack pine timber type, only a change in weather can slow the fire. Fire managers should con- sider creating fuel breaks com- posed of hardwoods. 2. Because residences near jack pine forests are increasing, an expanded program should be developed to tell homeowners about the potential for wildfire damage and how to locate and landscape their homes to prevent loss. 3. Fire managers need to plan care- fully the transition from pre- scribed fire to wildfire control, because abandoning a prescribed fire when control actions begin can allow more escapes that threaten initial attack crews. 4. Because fires in jack pine can develop from initial attack to project scale in15 to30 min- utes, fire managers need to develop mobilization procedures so that their organizations can respond within that time. 5. Procedures for the safe use and control of heavy-duty equipment need tobe emphasized. The speed and ruggedness ofthe equipment can allow itto outrun backup forces andto lull the operator into a false sense of security. 6. Lake States fire managers need to recognize that, because staff turnovers in this area are more frequent than major fires, special emphasis on training is needed so that firefighters canbe pre- pared for major outbreaks. Nature works ona much grander scale and longer timetable than people. Oneor more decades may elapse before all circumstances are just right again, butwe must not allow the passage of time to cloud the memory ofall the lessons that Mack Lake can teach us.■ The fire released the energy equivalent of340,000 barrels ofoil, orsix times the energy ofthe Hiroshima atomic bomb.
On August 29, 1985, 73 firefight- ers were forced into safety zones, where they took refuge in their fire shelters for1 to2 hours while a very severe crown fire burned over them. The incident took place onthe Butte Fire onthe Salmon National Forest in Idaho. Five firefighters were hospitalized overnight for heat exhaustion, smoke inhalation, and dehydration; the others escaped uninjured. Investigators estimated that with- out the protection ofthe escape zones and the fire shelters, at least 60of the73 firefighters would have died. Thanks to preparation of safe- ty zones, the effectiveness ofthe fire shelters, and the sensible behavior ofthe firefighters them- selves, disaster was averted. Behavior ofthe Butte Fire, particu- larly its explosive movement onthe afternoon of August 29, isof vital interest to fire behavior specialists, individual firefighters, and leaders who make tactical decisions based on fire behavior projections. That an already large and intense fire could rapidly escalate to even high- er intensity—some have called ita firestorm—and move fast enough to overrun 73 firefighters warrants review by anyone concerned with fire management. Immediately after the shelter inci- dent, a review team was dispatched tothe Butte Fire to document the meteorological conditions and fire behavior that contributed tothe life-threatening runup Wallace Creek. Results ofthe analysis were distributed toall wildland fire man- agement agencies early the follow- ing week. The review team was composed of Dennis Martin and Hank Walters, Forest Service Intermountain Region; Clyde O’Dell, National Weather Service; Dick Rothermel, Intermountain Fire Sciences Laboratory; and Bob Mutch, Forest Service Northern Region. The purpose of this article isto augment and expand the results ofthe initial review through additional interviews with those who had been onthe fireline andan analysis of photographs taken during and after the fire run. Art Jukkala and Ted Putnam ofthe Missoula Equipment Development Center have also prepared a report onthe performance ofthe fire shel- ter based on many interviews with those who used iton the Butte Fire (see Jukkala and Putnam 1986). A separate review ofthe Butte Fire and adjacent fires inthe Salmon River (termed the Long Tom Complex), conducted bythe Forest Service Intermountain Region in October 1985, examined such top- icsas strategy, tactics, and other issues. The results of this review areon file inthe Forest Service regional office in Ogden, UT. Fire Environment Severe drought characterized weather inthe Butte Fire area throughout the summer of 1985, contributing to critically low fuel moisture levels. The fire weather station at nearby Indianola along the Salmon River measured only 0.31 inch (0.79cm) of precipitation in June and0.23 inch (0.58cm) in July. Although more than half an inch (2.5cm) of precipitation fell ontwo different days in early August, some of this as snow, only 0.12 inch (0.30cm) fell between August 13and August 31. Ata remote automatic weather station near the fire, 1,000-hour fuel mois- ture readings from the National Fire Danger Rating System were rated at8 percent prior tothe runup Wallace Creek. The weather onthe Butte Fire from Monday, August 26, though Friday, August 30, was not unusual consid- ering the location. Elevation at Base Camp was7,400 feet (2,300m); elevations onthe fire ranged from 6,400 feet (2,000m) near the confluence of Wallace and Owl Creeks to8,200 feet (2,500m) near the two safety zones. Typical late afternoon maximum temperature reached 70to 78 °F (21–26ºC), B EHAVIOR OFTHE LIFE -T HREATENING B UTTE FIRE : A UGUST 27–29, 1985* Richard C. Rothermel and Robert W. Mutch * The article is reprinted from Fire Management Notes 47(2) [Spring 1986]: 14–24. When this article was originally published, Dick Rothermel and Bob Mutch were, respectively, a project leader, Fire Behavior Research Work Unit, USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station, Missoula, MT; anda fire use specialist, USDA Forest Service, Northern Region, Missoula, MT. Seventy-three firefighters were forced into safety zones; without escape zones and fire shelters, at least 60of the73 firefighters would likely have died.
with minimum relative humidity inthe 12to 21 percent range at Sourdough Base Camp. The windi- est period each day occurred between 1400 and 1500 mountain daylight time. The velocity was gen- erally between 10and 12 miles per hour (16–19km/h), with stronger gusts. Inversions occurred each day, breaking between 1130 and 1330. Weather onthe dayof the blowup, August 29, was not unusual, either. Inthe afternoon the temperature reached the mid-70’s (23–25ºC), and minimum relative humidity wasin the upper teens. At base camp, low-level winds were outof the south at8 to12 miles per hour (12–19km) inthe afternoon, with occasional gusts to17 to20 miles per hour (27–32km/h). District personnel reported that fuel load- ings ranged from 80to 100 tons per acre in spruce–fir stands in drainage bottoms, to25 to40 tons per acre in higher elevation lodge- pole pine–fir stands. Fuel models 8and 10 characterized most ofthe Wallace Creek drainage. One unusual feature ofthe area threatened by fire was the topogra- phy. The upper slopes did not con- verge into sharp peaks asis com- monly the case inthe Rocky Mountains, but tended tobe dome- like, with continuous crown cover. Wallace Creek itself wasa well- defined north–south drainage that became progressively steeper atits headwaters near the two shelter sites. General Fire Behavior The Butte Fire was started by light- ning on July 20, 1985. This fire was part ofthe Long Tom Fire Complex inthe Salmon River drainage, which included the Corn Lake, Bear, Fountain, Goat Lake, and Ebenezer Fires. The Butte Fire was first contained on August 5at just over 20,000 acres (8,100ha). Strong winds fanned smoldering fuels and spread fire across control lines on August 24and 25. Fire activity peaked on August 27, 28, and29, asthe fire made runs of1,000, 2,000, and3,500 acres (400, 800, and1,400ha) respectively. About 3,000of the3,500-acre (1,200of 1,400-ha) growth on August 29 reportedly occurred in about 90 minutes. Itwas during this runup Wallace Creek that the73 firefighters deployed their fire shelters. Simultaneously, another runof lesser severity occurred inOwl Creek, the drainage east of Wallace Creek. Both columns were charac- terized by dense black smoke. By midafternoon the Wallace Creek column had reached 15,000to 17,000 feet (4,600–5,200m) above terrain and had a firm cumulus cap. Another area of intense fire activity took place onthe western flank where the fire spread north- ward but was apparently pulled into the main fire in Wallace Creek. Events of August 29On August 29 wind velocities were not especially high. Inthe early afternoon, eye level winds were measured at7 to8 miles per hour (11–13km/h) atthe confluence ofOwl Creek and Wallace Creek. Atthe higher elevation near the head of Wallace Creek, the local winds were stronger. Division Supervision Jim Steele estimated winds tobe 10to 15 miles per hour (16–24km/h), with gusts to20 miles per hour (32km/h) across the ridges. Measure- ments nearby confirmed this esti- mate, but with gusts of25 to30 miles per hour (32–48km/h). Figure 1 shows the fire area at 0200 inthe morning on August 28, the day before the big run, and its extent by 2200 inthe evening. By 0200 inthe morning of August 29, the fire had spread considerably further, having crossed the lower endof Wallace Creek and moved upthe ridge toward Owl Creek. The burned areas in lower Wallace Creek were patchy. Of special importance onthe morning of August 29 were the spot fires inthe middle portion of Wallace Creek and along Owl Creek atthe south- east corner ofthe fire. An understanding ofthe fire con- trol operations is essential to understanding many events during the 29th. Having had little success at close-in direct attack onthe 26th and 27th, the overhead team had decided touse an indirect attack strategy. Onthe 28th and 29th, a tractor line was built along the main ridge onthe north endof the fire, approximately 1.5 miles (2.4km) north ofthe nearest spot fires in Wallace Creek (fig. 1). Fortun- ately, the line construction includ- ed several safety zones 300to 400 feet (90–120m) in diameter at approximately 1/4-mile (0.4-km) intervals. The plan for the 29th wasto conduct a burnout operation inthe late afternoon when humidity was expected to rise. An aerial drip torch would be used for center fir- ingin the upper endof Wallace Creek. Crews were tobe dispersed along the line to burn out from the line after a convection column was developed. At least three large whirlwinds passed over that were strong enough to knock people off balance. —Firefighter Steve Karkanen, describing the fire from a safety zone
During the morning of August 29, spot fires near the confluence of Wallace and Owl Creeks threatened valuable timber and seemed to have the potential to outflank the con- trol line tothe east. Thus, itwas decided touse the helitorch early inthe dayto burn out and stabilize the line in this area. Initial at- tempts began just tothe north ofOwl Creek (marked Aon fig. 1) about 1200. The area did not burn very well, and ignition attempts were repeated. Bill Williams, the operations chief, reported that this fire was ineffective at developing a significant fire column necessary for improving the fireline. While attempts to burn out line near Owl Creek were in progress, the fire was developing strength in lower Wallace Creek. Three reports substantiate the development of fire in Wallace Creek. Bill Williams reported a large convection column east of Dishpan Springs. Dave Broberg, division supervisor inOwl Creek, reported two strong columns developing, one near drop point 30at the upper endof Sourdough Creek and the other east of Dishpan Springs. Gary Orr, the division supervisor onthe west side at drop point 30, saw the fire east ofhim throwing fire brands into Wallace Creek. Orr reported that the fire in this area was becoming active around 1100. The spots along Owl Creek also became active and developed a strong convection column by 1300 (fig. 2). Smoke from these spots and from the helitorch fire was moving tothe north. It appeared to some that these columns were being pulled tothe north bythe larger column developing tothe northwest. With the aid of indrafts to these columns, the helitorch was used to burn out hand line and dozer line in areas Cand D near the confluence of Sourdough and Owl Creek. Meanwhile, Gary Orrat drop point 30 reported lots of fire in lower Wallace Creek. Considerable red coloration could be seen inthe smoke columns, andat 1300 or 1400 the fire was intensifying and moving up Wallace Creek. The heli- torch continued burning out the line in area C. Later, at approxi- mately 1500, area Dwas burned according to Bill Williams and Dave Broberg. Photographs looking north taken from a helicopter just tothe south ofthe convergence of Sourdough, Wallace, and Owl Creeks (fig. 2) show the smoke columns building at about 1515. From this vantage point, the strongest column was from the burnout operation and spots inOwl Creek. Allof the smoke was moving northward up Wallace Creek. The Figure 1—Arrows depict major fire runs onthe Butte Fire during the afternoon of August 29, 1985. The73 firefighters deployed fire shelters atthe lower shelter area and Tin Cup Hill shelter area. Areas A, B, C, andD indicate where the helitorch burnout operation was conducted that afternoon. Each time they were hitby anew wave of fire, the firefighters moved, crawling along the ground inside their shelters searching for cooler areas ofthe safety zone.
firing operation atthe south endof the fire was completed successfully about 1550, and the fire was con- tained along the southern line just asit was reaching full strength in upper Wallace Creek. Wallace Creek Run About 1515, Jim Steele, atthe northeast endof the fire, who later went into his shelter atTin Cup Hill, reported that hewas walking onthe trail above the large clearcut and could see fire coming up over a ridge tothe south. He reported that at that time he could not see fire in Wallace Creek because of interven- ing smoke and trees. The fire hesaw tothe south was probably com- ing out ofOwl Creek. Bill Williams reported that about this same time a large, strong con- vection column was standing over the fire. This column was within the main northern dozer line, and Bill still hoped touse indrafts from the column to complete the planned burnout in upper Wallace Creek. Because a very severe crown fire started moving tothe north up Wallace Creek ona western expo- sure (the east side of Wallace Creek) though extremely heavy fuels, the helitorch was never used in this area as originally planned. Gene Benedict, the incident com- mander, was returning tothe fire by helicopter between 1500 and 1515 and reported that “while view- ing this fire Ihad three other con- vection columns in view: Goat Creek onthe Salmon National Forest, Hand Meadows onthe Payette National Forest (anew start), anda fire onthe Nezperce near Cotter Bar. All fires were extremely active with apparent strong convective activity and sub- stantial rates of spread, except for Goat Creek, which was topographi- cally confined.” After landing, Gene received reports that the fire in Sourdough Creek had moved into Wallace Creek and had started firestorm.* Initial reports said it covered about 2 miles (3km) in15 minutes. (This later proved tobe an overestima- tion.) Right after the major run, a second run started onthe west side near drop point 30, apparently out- side the dozer line. Initially, it spread rapidly tothe north, but then veered tothe east, probably dueto indrafts from the larger col- umnin Wallace Creek. This sec- ondary run threatened firefighters along the line onthe west side, who were evacuated by pickup truck and helicopter. Although this rescue was overshadowed bythe fire shelter deployment, itwas nev- ertheless an intensive effort accom- plished safely. Neal Davis, air attack supervisor, flew by helicopter around the fire just after 1400 and again at 1515. He provided estimates ofthe fire location in Wallace Creek before the fire developed the extreme behavior reported later. Onhis next flight, at 1550, Neal saw the fire- fighters inthe safety zones prepar- ingto go into their shelters. Firefighter Steve Karkanen, work- ing between drop point 28and the large clearcut atthe head of Wallace Creek, recorded the move- ment ofthe crown fire asit pro- gressed up Wallace Creek. Steve * Although referred toas a firestorm, it should more properly be called a conflagration, which isa severe spreading fire. The term “firestorm” is normally used to describe a severe stationary fire or burnout ofan area within a conflagration. Figure 2—Convection column development near the confluence of Sourdough, Wallace, and Owl Creeks at about 1515 mountain daylight time on August 29. These columns originated from spot fires and helitorch operations. After 40 minutes in their shelters, they came out, but dense smoke forced them back in again for another 30 minutes; air entering the shelters was remarkably free of smoke.
took color photographs ofthe fire, recording his location, the direc- tion hewas shooting, and the esti- mated time and location ofthe fire front. His notes were especially helpful in reconstructing the fire movement. His notes at 1600 describe the nature ofthe fire asit passed around the large clearcut: Experiencing intense heat and high winds from all directions. At least three large whirlwinds passed over that were strong enough to knock people off balance. The area became too smoky and dusty to take photos. The smoke column completely enveloped everyone, andit was impossible tosee the fire. Visibility was reduced to zero several seconds ata time, the air was very hot, and the area was showered with burning embers. Personnel within the clearcut did not take to their shelters, a dozer was used to build fireline around the vehicles, and the pumper crew worked on small spot fires in flashy fuels. Personnel atthe lower shelter area reported that the fire reached them at 1610. Jim Steele reports that the firefighters onTin Cup Hill went into their shelters approximately 10to 12 minutes before those inthe lower area did. This would have put them in their shelters at just about 1600, ora couple of minutes before. Steele further reports that the fire approached them at about 1545 outof a draw tothe southeast. While Steele was preparing toget into his shelter, he talked by radio to Strike Team Leader Ron Yacomella atthe lower shelter area approximately 1,000 feet (300m) away. Ron asked ifhe should start his backfire at this time, which hedid. His crew burned out approximately 200 feet (60m) in front ofthe lower shelter zone before the fire hitat 1610. Their backfire started easily. At first strong indrafts pulled the fire and smoke toward the fire front, but later the smoke blew back over the crew. The Nature ofthe Fire From observations by Neal Davis, Steve Karkanen, Jim Steele, and Ron Yacomella, we have recon- structed the probable location and time ofthe fire front asit moved up Wallace Creek and overran the crews (fig. 1). The rate of spread during the run is derived by scaling the distances from the map at each timeline. It appears that up until about 1530, although crowning and developing strong convection columns, the fire behavior was similar tothe behav- ior observed onthe two preceding days (table 1). The spread rate was low, about 1/3 mile per hour (0.5km/h). After 1530 the fire spread much faster, with an average rate of about 2 miles per hour (3.2km/h) anda maximum of about 3-1/2 miles per hour (5.6km/h). This period was described asa firestorm by observers. The fire hadto travel slightly over 1 mile (1.6km) in half an hour to reach the safety zone. In order for the firefighters to reach the large clearcut from the lower safety zone, they would have hadto begin the evacuation by 1530. As with any fire, this one must have moved by surges, with some peri- odsof little orno spread. The reconstructed spread rates are too coarse to show the surges and appear tobe slower than the impression received by observers onthe ground. Jim Steele reported that onTin Cup Hill, firefighters in their shel- ters were hitby three waves of fire, the first one from the southeast. The second one burned upthe north side and then burned back towards them at about the same Viewed from the air, ahead ofthe fire, the flames were estimated tobe twoto three times the tree height. Table 1—Behavior of Wallace Creek fire runon the afternoon of August 29, 1985. Time period Elapsed time Distance Rate of spread 1430–1530 60min 0.32mi 0.32mi/h26 ch/h 1530–1550 20min 0.48mi 1.45mi/h116 ch/h 1550–1555 5min 0.29mi 3.48mi/h278 ch/h 1555–1600 5min 0.14mi 1.68mi/h134 ch/h 1600–1610 10min 0.15mi 0.90mi/h72 ch/h
time asthe people inthe lower safety zone were going into their shelters. The third wave hit from the southwest. Each time they were hitby anew wave of fire, the fire- fighters moved, crawling along the ground inside their shelters search- ing for cooler areas ofthe safety zone. Atone time they moved away from the dozer piles of slash that had been made during the clearing ofthe safety zone. After 40 minutes in their shelters, they came out, but dense smoke forced them back in again for another 30 minutes. The air entering the shelters around the lower edges was appar- ently remarkably free of smoke. The fire that overran the crews was very large and very intense. Figure 3 shows the nature ofthe fire asit passed over the shelters and indi- cates the size ofthe column in comparison tothe trees. Inthe original color slide, the convection column shows red coloration for hundreds of feet above the trees. The fire at this time was almost certainly an independent crown fire (Van Wagner 1977). Viewed from the front, the fire appeared asa wall of flame 200to 300 feet (60–90m) high. Viewed from the air, ahead ofthe fire, the flames were estimated tobe twoto three times the tree height. The fire front was advancing asa typical standing flame with the base ofthe fire inthe trees. The flames inthe front were not seen tobe rotating or turbulent. The smoke was rising sufficiently so that the flame could be seen clearly. The column rose nearly vertically, then tilted toward the north. The rear ofthe column wasa turbulent, swirling mass impressive inits extreme behavior. After the run, aerial inspection of upper Wallace Creek revealed a large, intensely burned area in which all crown needles and small- er surface fuels were essentially gone. There was, however, noevi- dence from the air, oron the ground near the shelter sites, of firestorm activity such as that seen onthe Sundance Fire inthe Idaho Panhandle in 1967. Trees were not laid down in patterns that would indicate large firewhirl activity. Some firewhirls had been observed during the fire, but trees were not knocked down, uprooted, or broken offas they were inthe Pack River Valley asa result ofthe Sundance Fire. Inside the Fire Shelters That all the firefighters inthe escape zones survived without seri- ous injury borders onthe miracu- lous. Nevertheless, the approach and passage ofthe fire wasa terrify- ing ordeal. Many, in fact, doubted that they would live though it. The trauma ofthe event was reflected in interviews with the survivors. Witnesses, allof them experienced firefighters, said that this wasno ordinary crown fire. To some itwas a standing wall of flame that reached 200 feet (61m) above the treetops. Others described itas a huge, rolling ball of fire with a bright orange glow. Some witnesses reported large balls of exploding gasses inthe flame front. Passage ofthe flame front was accompanied bya roaring sound, like that ofa jet airplane ora train. One firefighter found this the most frightening part ofthe ordeal: “The noise builds up until you can’t hear yourself think and then the ground begins to shake.” He estimated that the shaking and roaring lasted 10 minutes. Over the roar ofthe fire he could hear the shouts of nearby firefighters screaming for reassur- ance, followed by shouts of encour- After the run, aerial inspection of upper Wallace Creek revealed a large, intensely burned area in which all crown needles and smaller surface fuels were essentially gone. Figure 3—A view ofthe fire asit reached upper Wallace Creek and overran the fire crews. The crews deployed their fire shelters in safety zones similar to those seen inthe foreground. This photo was taken from a helicopter looking toward the east.
agement from other firefighters. Strong, fire-induced turbulence made it difficult to deploy shelters and keep them down. One witness reported a feeling of weightless- ness, of being lifted off the ground. Another reported the shelter being slammed down against his legs. Within the safety zones, everyone moved asfar as possible from the flame fronts by crawling along under the shelter. Within the shelters, firefighters experienced extreme heat foras much as10 minutes. Shelters were sohot that they could only behan- dled with gloves. Light entering the shelter though pinholes changed from dark redat peak intensity, to orange, to white, asthe fire passed over. One survivor said that atone point the ground looked as though ithad been painted a bright orange. Firefighters learned to evaluate the color ofthe light asan indication ofthe fire’s intensity in order to judge when itwas safe to come outof their shelters. After leaving the shelters, some firefighters showed symptoms of carbon monoxide poisoning: vomit- ing, disorientation, difficulty in breathing. Emergency medical technicians administered oxygen to several individuals; five were evacu- ated toa hospital for treatment and observation. All fully recovered. Among those interviewed, the con- sensus was that without the shel- ters none would have survived. A fire fighter with 20 years experi- ence summed itup as follows: “The most frightening, scariest experi- ence I’ve ever had. The fire was over us, around us, everywhere. Iwas in Vietnam fora year, but this beats itall.” Factors Contributing to Fire Behavior Fire activity inthe preceding days contributed tothe ease with which the fire in Wallace Creek began. Fire behavior onthe afternoon of Thursday, August 29, wasa repeat, albeit a much more severe repeat, ofthe fire behavior ofthe preced- ing two days. Each day took out more acreage and consequently left a larger holdover fire for the fol- lowing day. Onthe morning ofthe 29th, the north edge ofthe fire was uncontained. Fuels were burned in patches, leaving large amounts of scorched fuel and trees within the fire area. The continuous fuels and lack of topographic barriers allowed the fire to move upthe slopes of Wallace Creek with only moderate winds. The topography contributed substantially tothe fire behavior and difficulty of control. The slopes from the valley bottoms were steep, contributing to rapid upslope runs; the ridge tops were rounded and covered with continuous fuels. Hence, there were no definite fire barriers such as steep rocky slopes, sharp ridges, or scrubby subalpine fuels. Examination of weather records failed to reveal any factors that would have contributed tothe large-scale convective activity observed on August 29. Theex- tremely dry spring and summer probably contributed tothe rapid spread ofthe fire and difficulty in controlling it. Ason other fires inthe northern Rocky Mountains at that time, tree crowns were extremely easy to ignite. Certainly the dry fuels onthe ground also contributed, although the major fire runs at this elevation (6,000to 8,000 feet [1,800–2,400m]) carried predominantly though the crowns. Fire Behavior Analysis Postfire analysis ofthe potential fire behavior in surface fuels was made with the BEHAVE fire predic- tion system (Andrews 1986) and displayed onthe fire characteristics Passage ofthe flame front was accompanied bya roaring sound, like that ofa jet airplane. Figure 4—Fire characteristics onthe Butte Fire.
chart (fig. 4). Fuel model 10was used. The values for fuel moistures ranged between 3and 7 percent. The light winds ofthe morning and early afternoon would have pro- duced fireline intensities of250 to500 Btu/ft.sec, making the fire diffi- cult to control. The stronger midafternoon winds would have produced fireline intensities inthe surface fuels of600 to1,500 Btu/ft.sec, virtually assuring an uncontrollable crown fire. The range ofthe conditions is shown bythe ellipses onthe fire characteris- tics chart (fig. 4). The inputs to BEHAVE and the outputs produced are shown in table 2. The calculated rate of spread inthe surface fuels was11 to19 chains per hour (726–1,254 feet per hour [221–382m/h]) inthe morning and early after noon. The higher wind- speeds in midafternoon would have pushed the rate upto 28to 57 chains per hour (1,848–2,762 feet per hour [563–842m/h]). Wedo not have methods for calculating crown fire rate of spread, butit has been found that crown fire spread canbe 2to 4 times faster than the rate of spread calculated for fuel model 10in fuels exposed tothe wind andas much as8 times faster ifthe fire is going up steep slopes (Rothermel 1985). Ifwe compare the calculated rate of spread inthe surface fuels with the crown fire values given in table 2, we find that for the period 1430 to 1530 the crown fire was1.4to 2.3 times faster than the surface fire. In late afternoon, from 1530 to 1610, the crown fire was2.6to 5.3 times faster. These values fall within the suggested range mentioned above. There isa great deal of uncertainty in this type of calculation, indicat- inga strong need for research on crown fire behavior and better guidelines for predicting the onset and spread of crown fires and potential blowup situations. Conclusions The type of fire run observed in upper Wallace Creek on August 29was not unusual for fires in lodge- pole pine during the 1985 fire sea- son throughout the northern Rocky Mountains. The high-inten- sity fire runs were the result of drought-induced, extremely low fuel moistures inall size classes and the speed ofthe transition from surface fires to torching, spot- ting, and crowning fires. Because large areas were burning un- checked by either fireline or natu- ral barriers anda southerly gradi- ent wind had reinforced upslope and upcanyon afternoon winds in Wallace Creek, the direction of fire spread and crown fire development before 1530 were nota surprise. The distance the fire spread, from 1530 to 1600, and its severity, were, however, unexpected. The large area of holdover fire adjacent to continuous timber with heavy sur- face fuels proved tobe a juxtaposi- tion capable of generating an Firefighters learned to evaluate the color ofthe light asan indication ofthe fire’s intensity in order to judge when itwas safe to come outof their shelters. Table 2b—BEHAVE outputs. Time Rate of spread Heat per unit area Fireline intensity Flame length Early afternoon 11–19ch/h 1286–1487 Btu/ft2 251–523 Btu/ft.sec5.7–8ft Midafternoon 28–57ch/h 1286–1487 Btu/ft2 664–1563 Btu/ft.sec8.9–13.3ft Table 2a—Data used in BEHAVE to assess fire behavior in surface fuels onthe Butte Fire. Element Data Fuel model 10 Fuel moisture: 1-hr3 to7% 10-hr6% 100-hr9% Live woody 75% Midflame windspeed: Early afternoon (sheltered) 4to 6mi/h Midafternoon (exposed) 10to 15mi/h Percent slope 45% Wind direction Directly uphill
incredible amount of energy ina short time. Although crown fires are often associated with strong winds, in this case winds of only 10to 15 miles per hour (16–26km/h), with some stronger gusts, were suffi- ciently strong to channel the flow upthe canyon and produce the exceptionally intense crown fire that overran the crews. The ques- tion arose asto whether the burnout operation with the heli- torch onthe south side ofthe fire directly accelerated the high-inten- sity runup Wallace Creek. Inter- views combined with a careful inspection of burning patterns ona 1/24,000 aerial photo mosaic did not reveal any fire behavior process whereby the helitorch burnout could have accelerated the run up Wallace Creek. The photo mosaic showed a patchy pattern of burned and unburned areas between the helitorch burning atthe confluence of Wallace and Owl Creeks and upper Wallace Creek. The burnout operation, however, probably con- tributed tothe shelter incident by preoccupying the attention of some key overhead personnel forso much ofthe afternoon of August 29. The “eyes inthe sky” reconnais- sance that had been routinely avail- able on previous days was not avail- able during the critical time on August 29. Early reports onthe Butte Fire estimated that the fire traveled 2 miles (3.2km) up Wallace Creek in15 minutes, ora spread rate of8 miles per hour (13km/h). This esti- mate now appears tobe consider- ably higher than the actual rate of spread. Reconstruction ofthe fire front location at various times indi- cated that the average spread rate was closer to2 miles per hour (3.2km/h) with a maximum of about 3- 1/2 miles per hour (5.6km/h). The safety zones that were bull- dozed into the tractor line atthe head of Wallace Creek made itpos- sible for73 firefighters to safely and effectively use their fire shel- ters and survive oneof the more violent fire runs observed inthe northern Rockies in 1985. But, asone crew foreman observed after the incident, “the best safety zone isone where a fire shelter isnot needed.” This conclusion deserves special emphasis whenever the Butte Fire is discussed. Preventing Future Incidents What measures canbe taken to prevent such a life-threatening event from recurring inthe future? Ifan indirect attack strategy is selected, then a fail-safe warning system must bein place to abso- lutely clear the line of personnel well in advance ofa high intensity run. Another approach in conifer forests isto select a direct attack strategy, build a line along the flanks ofthe fire from a well- secured anchor point, and attack the head ofthe fire only when fuels, weather, and topographic conditions allow firefighters to work safely. Whatever the strategy selected, the fundamental principles of fire behavior and fire suppression should always guide decisions that affect the health and welfare ofthe firefighter. Despite the remarkable progress made in fire management inthe past quarter ofa century— better understanding of fire behav- ior, better trained and equipped fire crews, more flexibility in attack strategy—conditions like those experienced inthe northern Rockies inthe summer of 1985 call for extreme vigilance inall aspects of fire suppression. And the safety ofthe individual firefighter is always the top priority. References Andrews, P.L. 1986. BEHAVE: Fire behavior prediction and fuel modeling system— BURN subsystem. Part I. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT–194. Ogden, UT: USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station. Jukkala, A.; Putnam, T. 1986. Forest fire shelters save lives. Fire Management Notes. 47(2): 3–5. Rothermel, R.C. 1985. Howto predict the spread and intensity of forest and range fires. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT–143. Ogden, UT: USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. Van Wagner, C.E. 1977. Conditions for the start and spread of crown fire. Canadian Journal of Forest Research. 7: 23–24. ■ That all the firefighters inthe escape zones survived without serious injury borders onthe miraculous. Ifan indirect attack strategy is selected, then a fail-safe warning system must bein place to absolutely clear the line of personnel well in advance ofa high intensity run.
Whenever New Jersey resi- dents discuss large forest fires, the discussion invari- ably ends up with what happened in April 1963. Asa boyof 14, I remember seeing the headlines and later while traveling tothe shore that summer, viewing mile after mile of blackened woodland and burnt foundations. After I came to work for the New Jersey forest fire service, Iwas fas- cinated bythe horror stories—tales ofa living hell with sheets of fire and houses bursting into flames from the radiated heat. And then there were the acts of heroism, such asthe removal ofa TV anten- na from the tail ofa forest fire drop plane that flew too low and the acts of folly, such asthe dispatching of useless hook and ladder trucks from Philadelphia. Many of those present during the fires have said that they have never seen anything like it, either before or since. It must have seemed asif the whole world wason fire! Asa firewarden I worry what I would doand howI would react if ever faced with a similar situation. Inthe last few years, noticing all the development inthe South Jersey area, I wonder what would the loss bein terms of human life and damage to improved property ifa forest fire disaster ofa similar magnitude happened today. The purpose of this case study isto take a look at what actually happened during Apri1 20–22, 1963. What were the preconditions leading upto the event. What was the damage, and finally what we might expect to happen ifa similar series of fires occurred today. Weather Conditions New Jersey, along with most ofthe East, had experienced severe drought conditions prior to April 20, 1963. The spring had been exceptionally dry and windy, thus far. Only an average of0.30 inch (0.76cm) of rainfall had fallen in April, and the total since March 20at the Lebanon Experimental Forest was only 0.57 inch (1.45cm). The precipitation deficit had been 3.00 inches (7.62cm) for March. Precipitation for April was already 2.00 inches (5.08cm) below normal when April 20 dawned bright, clear, and exceptionally dry. The Build-up Index (Cumulative Drying Factor) was recorded at115, and the relative humidity was23 percent at10 a.m. In addition tothe dryness, wind conditions played a primary role inthe havoc that followed. At9 a.m., wind speeds ina wooded area near the ground were clocked at12 * The article is reprinted from Fire Management Notes 48(1) [Winter 1987]: 3–6. Itwas adapted from New Jersey Outdoors. When this article was originally published, Joseph Hughes was the Assistant State Firewarden for the New Jersey Fire Service, Trenton, NJ. Developers in previously wilderness areas ofNew Jersey often continue to ignore the potential for damage from wildfire. EW ERSEY PRIL CAN ITH APPEN A GAIN ?* Joseph Hughes Iwas fascinated bythe horror stories—tales ofa living hell with sheets of fire and houses bursting into flames from the radiated heat.
miles per hour (19km/h). However, in openings and above treetops velocities averaged 30to 40 miles per hour (50–65km/h) with gusts of more than 50 miles per hour (80km/hr). Not only were velocities high, but the winds were extremely turbulent. Many small whirlwinds developed. Sand and dust storms were prevalent throughout the Delaware Valley wherever plowing or land clearing operations had left soil unprotected. Prevailing wind directions during the day shifted from northwest to west, back to northwest, then final- ly shifting to almost north that night. Winds shifted as much as90 percent within afew minutes. The turbulent and high velocity winds were caused bythe passage ofa dry cold front. Later studies of weather records atthe Philadelphia Weather Bureau indicated the pres- ence ofa low level jet wind over the Philadelphia and South Jersey area on April 20. Dry and windy conditions com- bined to make the burning index at Apple Pie Hill Tower 200, highest ever recorded inNew Jersey; fire weather conditions were the worst possible. Origin ofthe Fires Several ofthe fires that reached major proportions started as early as9 a.m. (table 1). The cause ofthe largest fire, which burned 76,000 acres (31,000ha), is well docu- mented. Three fires started between Ongs Hat, Pemberton Road, and Lower Mill in Pemberton Township, Burlington County, between 9a.m. and1 p.m. asthe result of local blueberry growers burning debris. Permits had been banned and announcements made in newspapers prohibiting burning. However, fires that had been held over indry fields from the previous day rekindled. Strong winds removed a covering of sand and fanned the smoldering embers to life! The first of these fires broke outat 9:50a.m. A strong suppression effort by ground crews, water tankers, anda drop plane operating outof Coyle Field held the fire in check. However, second and third fires broke outin the early after- noon from adjacent properties. These additional fires, combined with winds of40 miles per hour (65km/h) and the fact that the plane had been pulled offto fight fires inthe Hammonton area, were more than the few tankers and hand crews could handle. By8 p.m. the head fire hit the Jersey Central Railroad near Bullock, covering a distance of9 miles (14km) in6 hours, ora sus- tained average forward rate-of- speed of1.5 miles per hour (2.4km/h). However, ground crews and personnel atthe scene reported short runs that may have approached 4.5 miles per hour (7.2km/h). Asthe day progressed numerous other fires began to break out throughout the State. Many ofthe fires burned into the night and through the next day without con- tainment or control. Needless tosay, State, county, and municipal firefighting forces were over- whelmed. Reports of large amounts of structural damage began to come in, and some deaths were reported. Many outside communities, want- ingto help in whatever way possi- ble, sent all kinds of equipment and volunteers. As mentioned earlier, hook and ladder and street cleaning trucks came from Philadelphia. Unfortunately, these just added tothe chaos and confusion. One vol- unteer fireman was killed when his truck ran into a State truck inthe smoke of Route 72, near Coyle Field, onthe 76,000-acre (31,000- ha) fire. A total of28 major fires (fires of more than 100 acres [40ha]) burned on April 20 along with 51 smaller fires, making a total of79 fires for the day. Damage figures were estimated at183,000 acres (74,000ha) burned, the single worst day for forest fires inNew Jersey since record keeping began in 1906. Damage to improved prop- Wildfire in wildland/urban interface area ofthe New Jersey Pine Barrens. It only took three days to devastate New Jersey with some ofthe worst fires ever reported inthe East.
Table 1—Major fires inNew Jersey on April 20, 1963. Location Start time Acres burned Division A—North Jersey 1. Lebanon Township, Hunterdon County 9:00am 1502. Warren Township, Somerset County 9:30am 100 Division B—Central Jersey 1. Jackson Township, Ocean County 9:54am 1,2002. Berkeley Township, Ocean County 10:00am 7003. Jackson/Frenchhold Township, Monmouth & Ocean Counties 10:28am 4,4804. Brick Township, Ocean County 10:45am 6005. Old Bridge Township, Middlesex County 12:13pm 2756. Stafford Township, Ocean County 12:30pm 1907. Jackson Township, Ocean County 12:30pm 14,0008. Pemberton Township, Ocean County 12:30pm 1,9009. Pemberton, Woodland, Manchester, Lacey, Stafford & Barnegat Townships, Ocean & Burlington Counties 12:45pm 74,47510. Jackson Township, Ocean County 1:08pm 11,30011. Marlboro/Old Bridge Townships, Middlesex County 2:15pm 2,00012. Howell Township, Monmouth County 2:38pm 80013. Evesham/Medford Townships, Burlington County 3:15pm 575 Division C—South Jersey 1. Clayton Township, Gloucester County 9:00am 1,9002. Mullica Township, Atlantic County 9:20am 11,5003. Franklin Township, Gloucester County 9:45am 6004. Buena Township, Atlantic County 10:50am 12,6005. Monroe Township, Gloucester County 11 :00am 2,7006. Winslow Township, Camden County 11:15am 2,2157. Lindenwold/Gibbsboro Townships, Camden County 12:10pm 2608. Monroe Township, Gloucester County 12:30pm 2,0009. Alloway Township, Salem County 12:30pm 1,00010. Hamilton Township, Atlantic County 1:00pm 4,16011. Hamilton Township, Atlantic County 1:15pm 15,00012. Hamilton/Egg Harbor Townships, Atlantic County 1:20pm 14,50013. Egg Harbor Township, Atlantic County 4:20pm 1,250
erty was estimated inthe millions of dollars, butit would be months before the damage was completely assessed. Moreover, the worst fire disaster inthe State’s history did not endon April 20. When April 21 dawned, allof South and Central Jersey was under a thick layer of smoke. Firefighters were tired, having worked through- out the night, but most fires were still burning outof control. The problem was compounded by fires continuing to break out. Twenty-six new fires occurred on April 21, including two major fires in Gloucester County—onein Monroe Township that began at11:30a.m. and burned 500 acres (200ha), and one in Milville Township that began at2:05p.m. and burned 160 acres (65ha). Fires continued to burn through- out the second day. However, the wind finally abated. Crews began to make headway; several fires were contained or brought under con- trol. On Monday, Apri1 22, there were 22new fires including a400-acre (160-ha) onein Franklin Township, Gloucester County, anda large jumpover from the13,000-acre (5,000-ha) fire burning in Buena Township, Atlantic County, which consumed an additional 5,500 acres (2,200) and threatened the town of Mixpah before being brought under control. On Monday night, rain began to fall. The worst was over. Only two new fires occurred on April 23. During the3-day period, there were a total of127 forest fires, 31of which reached major status. The acreage burned was 190,300 acres (77,010ha). Nearly 4 percent ofthe entire land area ofthe State was burned during the3-day ordeal. Twenty-eight percent ofthe entire forest acreage burned inthe Northeastern States in 1963 occurred inNew Jersey. Itwas sev- eral months before all the damage estimates were in. Asthe figures came ina grim total emerged. Damage estimates ranged from 1.5to 9.5 million dollars! A total of404 structures had been damaged or destroyed (table 2). Worst ofall, seven persons had been killed including a family in Jackson Township, and the fireman previ- ously mentioned. Prognosis for the Future It’snow been 24 years since April 1963. What has happened in that span of time? The woods have grown back in places. People have built new homes where the previ- ous ones burned down, much as people will return and build ona barrier island right after a hurri- cane has leveled everything. In addition to what was there original- ly, there has been major develop- ment inthe Central and South Jersey areas previously burned andin adjacent, equally hazardous areas. Many residents have forgot- ten about 1963 and those newto the area maybe unaware that such a disaster ever occurred. What would happen ifa similar fire occurred inthe South and Central Jersey area today? Just taking infla- tion into account would increase the damage to improved property to $60 million. Anew home that sold for $12,000to $15,000in 1963 costs at least $85,000 today. In addition, the $5,000 summer cot- tages of years ago have been replaced by year-round $100,000 estates. None of this takes into account the increases in develop- ment or population. Itwas estimat- edby a former section warden, now division firewarden, that ifa fire similar tothe one that burned 14,500 acres (5,900ha) in Twenty-eight percent ofthe entire forest acreage burned inthe Northeastern States in 1963 occurred inNew Jersey. 186 Houses damaged or destroyed 2 Sawmills 3 Hunting club buildings 191 Outbuildings (sheds, barns, garages, chicken coops) 1Bar/restaurant 23 Vehicles 12 House trailers 1 Government office building 2 Blueberry fields 5 Camp buildings destroyed, 1 damaged 1 Laundromat 45 Acres of Cranberries 3 Churches 1Gas station $70,000 Pulpwood value Table 2—Damage to improved property caused by fires inNew Jersey on April 20, 1963.
Hamilton and Egg Harbor Townships in 1963 and destroyed 12 houses then broke out today, 100 homes would be lost. Ifa simi- lar multiplier is applied across the board, the loss would approach 1,500 homes with a total estimated value of over $112 million. It should be emphasized that esti- mates are just that … estimates! Itis impossible to tell what would happen with any degree of accuracy because there areso many variables andso many things have changed. However, I think itcan be said with some degree of certainty that ifa similar disaster occurred today it would be much worse, and damage estimates would be considerably higher than in 1963. The stage isset. Twoof the three critical factors are already present: • Highly hazardous wildland fuel, and • Numerous human ignition sources. Weather isthe third critical vari- able. Conditions need only be simi- larto those on April 20, 1963, fora major wildland fire to occur. ■ People have built new homes where the previous ones burned down, much as people will return and build ona barrier island right after a hurricane has leveled everything. Wildland firefighter at work.
Ifyou were nota member ofa fire suppression crew, the afternoon of Mother’sDay, May9, 1976, wasa beautiful time tobe in central Wisconsin. Skies were mostly clear with the temperature inthe high 70’s, relative humidity near 20per- cent, and winds, light and vari- able—just the kind of situation that can lead to explosive wildland fires inthe jack pine country at that time of year. New Miner Fire Fire towers reported smoke at 1415. At 1430, when the first forces arrived atthe New Miner Fire, they found 2 acres (0.8ha) of pine log- ging slash already burning with spot fires several hundred yards tothe northeast. A tractor-plow unit was able to complete a circuit around the head ofthe fire, but the flames jumped the furrow almost immediately. Within afew minutes the fire entered a pine plantation and began to crown. The fire grew in momentum asa light southwester- ly wind pushed it through dense pine plantations and natural jack pine stands. Fire behavior became the major problem. The pine stands began to burn so intensely that flames reached 300 feet (90m); atone point, suppression forces were concerned that spotting would carry embers across a2.5-mile (4-km) drainage area and begin anew series of fires onthe other side. Other interesting behavioral fea- tures quickly developed. As Bill Peterson ofthe Wisconsin Depart- ment of Natural Resources putit, “It appeared that the fire bucket wasso full that flames began to spill over the sides.” The smoke column split into two separate, slowly revolving vortices (fig. 1). Periodically these vortices spilled over the flanks, dropped tothe ground (fig. 2), then reformed into a single column. Horizontal vortex activity along the flanks (fig. 3) threw so many firebrands into unburned fuels that, in some sectors, several lines were plowed parallel toand 200 feet (60m) out from the (initial) main body before suppression forces contained the lateral spread. Cylinders of Fire A tractor operator plowing along the flanks about 20 feet (6m) from the main body ofthe fire was trapped as flames from a horizontal ORIZONTAL ORTICES AND THE EWM INER FIRE * Donald A. Haines * The article is reprinted from Fire Management Notes 48(4) [Fall 1987]: 26–28. When this article was originally published, Donald Haines was the principal research meteorologist for the USDA Forest Service, North Central Forest Experimentation Station, East Lansing, MI. The smoke column split into two separate, slowly revolving vortices, which periodically spilled over the flanks, dropped tothe ground, then reformed into a single column. Figure 1—The smoke column onthe New Miner Fire after splitting into a horizontal vor- tex pair. The ambient wind is blowing toward a point tothe left ofthe observer. Photo: Bill Peterson, Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
vortex came over the top ofhis unit. His planned escape route was perpendicular tothe flank ofthe main body ofthe fire, but this would have taken him into a region of intense fire activity. He escaped, but his tractor unit was destroyed. Obviously this type of fire activity threatened suppression forces. What was happening? The horizon- tal vortices that formed in this fire were like slowly rolling cylinders of fire and ash, akin to lazy tornadoes lying on their sides. This type of vortex isa common feature offlu- ids. However, unlike vertical vor- tices, such as tornadoes or most fire whirls where the spin is rapid, the angular velocity of this type is usually quite low. These vortices, which may spiral outto the sides while moving downwind, are relat- edto other phenomena: the slow swirls ofair inthe atmosphere that cause long parallel lines of clouds called “cloud streets” as well asthe helical motions in lakes that cause the formation of parallel lines of surface debris. Wind Tunnel Simulation We carried outa series of experi- ments, attempting to create hori- zontal vortices ina wind tunnel by first placing an electronically heat- ed metal ribbon along the length ofthe tunnel floor. The heated ribbon simulated the flank ofa wildland fire. Smoke generated upstream ofthe simulated fire flank made the airflow visible. As expected, buoyant forces caused bythe heated ribbon created an upflow ofair passing along and above the ribbon. A vertical slit cut into the wind tunnel’s side allowed light into the tunnel. The light out- lined a thin cross-section ofthe “It appeared that the fire bucket wasso full that flames began to spill over the sides.” –Bill Peterson, Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources Figure 2—The split smoke column with the counterrotating vortex onthe left side ofthe picture “collapsing and spilling” over the flank ofthe fire. The ambient wind is blowing toward a point tothe left ofthe observer. Photo: Bill Peterson, Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. Figure 3—A vortex with a diameter of about 15 feet (4.6m) onthe flank ofthe fire. Implied airflow is outlined bythe curving arrows. Flames are moving outof the main body ofthe fire at30- to50-degree angles and making “rolls” back into the fire. The ambient wind is blowing from right to left inthe photograph. Photo: Donald Krohn, Nekoosa Paper Inc., Port Edwards, WI.
smoke-filled air flow showing that a pair of horizontal vortices had formed, topping the smoke plume (fig. 4). The wind tunnel vortices areso similar to those seen in wild- land fires that we believe that the laboratory simulation is close tothe real thing. We still don’t understand several facts about these vortices. For example, they form under relatively low windspeeds; therefore, what are the upper limits of windspeed and turbulence intensity that will still allow formation? What isthe cause of vortex collapse? We have gener- ated a somewhat similar vortex col- lapse ina wind tunnel experiment using upstream obstacles that pro- duced a wake effect, butwe don’t know if this isthe same cause and effect relationship seen in nature. Have You Seen Them? We would appreciate information from firefighters telling of their experiences with horizontal vor- tices so that wecan compare our wind tunnel results tothe wildland situation. Film, pictures, personal anecdotes, and action evidence of horizontal vortices will be grateful- ly received and acknowledged. Field feedback is essential toour under- standing of this process; and understanding the characteristics of these vortices is important in fire behavior, in fire control, andin A tractor operator plowing along the flanks about 20 feet from the main body ofthe fire was trapped as flames from a horizontal vortex came over the top ofhis unit. Unlike vertical vortices, such as tornadoes or most fire whirls where the spin is rapid, the angular velocity of this type is usually quite low. Figure 4—A laser-illuminated, thin cross-section ofa vortex pair generated ina wind tunnel over a heated, longitudinally embedded nichrome wire simulating a fire’s flank. The photograph was taken with the camera positioned downstream atthe tunnel exit directly onthe axis of flow.
Wallace Lake is located in eastern Manitoba approxi- mately 100 miles (160km) northeast of Winnipeg. The sur- rounding area comprises mainly mature jack pine and black spruce stands andis a popular location for summer cottage developments. Spring fires in this area are not uncommon, but the 1987 Wallace Lake Fire was one ofthe most dev- astating wildfires in modern times. It also has special significance for two main reasons. First, itwas the first campaign fire in Manitoba during which the Canadian Forest Fire Behavior Prediction (FBP) System (Lawson and others 1985) was used operationally to forecast probable fire behavior ona near real-time basis. Second, the fire produced oneof the worst wild- land/urban interface incidents inthe province’s history. Dry Conditions The Wallace Lake Fire started on Tuesday, May5, andby May13 reached its final size of51,520 acres (20,850ha). The winter of 1986–87was unusually warm and much ofthe fire area experienced below-normal precipitation. Snowmelt occurred rather rapidly in early April dueto a strong and persistent upper ridge pattern over the area that produced record max- imum temperatures on numerous days. Total precipitation following snow-free cover was minimal. Four weather stations inthe general area reported an average of only 0.13 inches (3.4mm) of rain. The com- bination of these factors con- tributed significantly tothe low moisture content ofthe dead forest fuels andin part tothe extreme fire behavior that occurred during the first half ofMay 1987. The majority ofthe area burned bythe Wallace Lake Fire was the result of three separate runs, which took place onMay 5, 8, and12 (fig. 1). The primary cause of these major fire runs was the strong sur- face winds associated with the pas- sage of three successive cold fronts. Average wind speeds were in excess of19 miles per hour (30km/h) on each of these days, with gusts upto 38 miles per hour (60km/h) being reported. Minimum relative humid- ity ranged from the high teens tolow thirties and maximum air tem- perature varied from 73ºF (23ºC) to90 ºF (32ºC). Valuable Asset The FBP System was used topre- dict potential fire behavior (e.g., spread rate and type of fire) and proved tobe a valuable asset tothe overhead team assigned tothe fire. The fire spread projections were sufficiently accurate and reliable tobe a major factor in determining evacuation requirements. ForN VERVIEW OFTHE W ALLACE LAKE FIRE , M ANITOBA * Kelvin G. Hirsch * The article is reprinted from Fire Management Notes 49(2) [Spring 1988]: 26–27. When this article was originally published, Kelvin Hirsch wasa fire research officer for the Canadian Forest Service, Manitoba District Office, Winnipeg, Manitoba. The fire produced oneof the worst wildland/urban interface incidents in Manitoba’s history. Figure 1—The Wallace Lake Fire during the initial stages (around 1500 CDT) ofits major runon May8, 1987. Photo: Manitoba Natural Resources.
example, onMay 8the fire jumped the established control line and raced eastward towards the subdivi- sion onthe west shore of Wallace Lake ata rate of2.4 miles per hour (3.9km/h). A lodge, campground, and54 of69 cottages were either damaged or destroyed by this fire (fig. 2). However, no lives were lost, because ofthe precautions taken bythe overhead team. The extensive property losses at Wallace Lake coupled with the $2.26 million fire suppression costs made the Wallace Lake Fire oneof the most expensive wildfires tobe fought in Manitoba. This fire did, however, illustrate the value and usefulness ofthe FBP System ona going fire and showed the potential consequences that many ofthe other cottage subdivisions in this general area could possibly face inthe future. Reference Lawson, B.D.; Stocks, B.J.; Alexander, M.E.; Van Wagner, C.E. 1985. A system for pre- dicting fire behavior in Canadian forests. In: Donoghue, L.R.; Martin, M.E., eds. Proceedings ofthe Eighth Conference on Fire and Forest Meteorology; 1985 April 29–May2; Detroit, MI. SAF Pub. 85–04. Bethesda, MD: Society of American Foresters: 6–16. ■ Figure 2—Aftermath ofthe Wallace Lake Fire atthe shoreline cottage subdivision onMay 8, 1987 around 1800 CDT. Photo: Manitoba Natural Resources. The Canadian Forest Fire Behavior Prediction System, first used on this fire, proved tobe a valuable asset tothe overhead team.
The documented behavior of free-burning wildfires canbe a valuable source of information for both fire researchers and opera- tional staff. For example, inan active fire situation, fire behavior observations provide a basis for suppression personnel to take action and advise personnel. Such information allows them todo the following: • Ona timely basis, inform and update district, regional, and provincial staff ofthe fire’s status. • Provide information that canbe used to brief both the media and the public. Ensure the safety of firefighting personnel by direct- ing them away from potentially dangerous situations. • Make immediate comparisons between actual and predicted fire behavior. Also, future benefits canbe gained from formally recording the influ- ences of weather, fuels, and topog- raphy ona fire’s behavior. That information can then be used asan effective training tool for suppres- sion staff since individuals relate well to recent real-life experiences in which they may have been involved. From a fire research perspective, observations of extreme fire behav- ior can supplement or verify the data presently used inthe develop- ment ofthe Canadian Forest Fire Behavior Prediction (FBP) System. The FBP System database currently consists of245 experimental and operational prescribed fires and45 documented wildfires (Lawson and others 1985). Presently, most ofthe information regarding fire behavior under extreme fire weather condi- tions is collected from wildfires since itis difficult to arrange and conduct experimental fires success- fully under such conditions. A detailed example ofa documented wildfire inthe Northwest Terri- tories is provided by Alexander and Lanoville (1987). This article summarizes the infor- mation needed to document wild- fire spread rates and illustrates that this isnot a complicated process but merely one that requires afew key observations. An example, taken from the information record- edby the suppression staff atthe 1988 Brereton Lake Fire in south- eastern Manitoba, has also been included. Information Requirements A summary ofthe information required to document accurately wildfire spread rates is given below. The FBP System user guide pro- vides a more detailed account ofthe information needed (Alexander and others 1984). Forward Rates of Spread. The posi- tion ofthe head fire at various times during a major run needs tobe recorded. Observations canbe made easily if landmarks such as roads, creeks, and hydro lines are used to plot the progression ofthe fire ona topographic map, forest inventory map, or recent aerial photograph. Position ofthe Flanks. Mapping or noting the positions ofthe fire’s flanks (along with that ofthe head fire) permits the length-to-length ratio ofthe fire tobe calculated. Other Fire Behavior Observations. Other observations not directly required to document the rate of spread but which canbe useful in understanding other aspects of fire behavior areas follows: • Type of fire (surface fire, torch- ing, crown fire); • Firewhirl development, occur- rence of spot fires, and associated distances; • Flame lengths or flame heights; Smoke column characteristics such as height of column or angle of tilt; D OCUMENTING W ILDFIRE B EHAVIOR : THE 1988 B RERETON LAKE FIRE , M ANITOBA * Kelvin G. Hirsch * The article is reprinted from Fire Management Notes 50(1) [Winter 1989]: 45–48. When this article was originally published, Kelvin Hirsch wasa fire research officer for the Canadian Forest Service, Manitoba District Office, Winnipeg, Manitoba. Fire behavior information canbe an effective training tool for suppression staff since individuals relate well to recent real-life experiences in which they may have been involved.
• Suppression effectiveness (for example, hand-constructed fire guards are challenged but water bombers are effective); • Depth of burn; • Mop-up difficulty; and • Postfire evidence such as narrow “streets” of unburned trees asso- ciated with horizontal roll vor- tices. Itis worth noting that a photo- graph canbe an exceptionally use- ful tool in documenting many aspects ofa fire’s behavior. A photo- graph is especially valuable ifthe time itwas taken is also recorded. This maybe done manually ora camera with a “dateback” attach- ment canbe used. Fire Weather Observations and Fire Danger Indexes. The most signifi- cant fire weather parameter to measure during a major fire runis windspeed and direction. Hourly observations ofthe wind, along with temperature and relative humidity, if possible, should be made ata weather station near the fire. However, if this isnot possible, then estimate these parameters atthe fire site by using, for instance, the Beaufort Scale to estimate windspeed. The information could also be obtained from a nearby fire weather station or Atmospheric Environment Service (AES) station. Inclusion ofthe daily fire weather observations that preceded the fire is important for calculating the val- uesof the Canadian Forest Fire Weather Index (FWI) System and for possible future analysis. Topography and Fuel Type Characteristics. For documenta- tion purposes, details onthe topog- raphy and fuel type mosaic inthe fire area can often be described after the fire has occurred. This may consist of information from 1:50,000 NTS topographic maps, FBP System fuel type maps pre- pared from Landsat imagery, orfor- est inventory data. However, obser- vations ofthe fire’s behavior inthe various fuel types andon different topographic features should be noted. Brereton Lake Fire Case Study Observations ofthe fire behavior atthe 1988 Brereton Lake Fire were made bya number of Manitoba Natural Resources staff members who were coordinating the fire suppression activities and posi- tioned primarily in helicopters. This information was recorded ver- bally on tape and also onto the dis- trict radio logs. Given below isa summary ofthe recorded fire behavior at various times during the major runon May1 (fig. 1) and how it relates tothe information required for documentation.* Forward rates of spread: • 1540 hours: The fire was detect- edand reported tothe Manitoba Natural Resources office in Rennie. Itwas located just west ofthe south railway crossing on Highway No. 307 and was less than 0.25 acres (0.1ha) in size. • 1550 hours: The fire crowned almost immediately and was heading northward towards the Brereton Lake subdivision. • 1634 hours: The head fire was estimated tobe approximately halfway to Brereton Lake, adis- tance of0.9 miles (1.5km) from the point of ignition. • 1706 hours: The fire wason the last ridge before the swamp, a distance of1.5 miles (2.4km) from the point of ignition. • 1753 hours: The head fire crossed the north tracks near the subdivision, approximately 1.9 miles (3.1km) from the point of ignition. In summary, the fire spread 1.9 miles (3.1km) in2 hours and13 minutes (133 minutes) fora rate of spread of76.4 feet per minute (23.3m/min) or0.88 miles per hour (1.4km/h). Position ofthe flanks: • 1746 hours: The fire was spread- ingat the back. • 1806 hours: The west side ofthe fire was crowning in black spruce and spreading rapidly. • 1924 hours: A small spot fire was just east of Highway No. 307. Other fire behavior observations: • 1734 hours: The head fire was too intense for crews to work in front ofthe fire, so suppression efforts were restricted tothe flanks. • 1920 hours: The first cottage was lost tothe fire. Itwas also noted that the fire was not continuously crowning; that is, some torching was occurring but spread was not sustained through the tree crowns. The fire spread primarily onthe jack pine ridges and only occasionally burned through the black spruce stands. Also, some mop-up difficulty was experienced in areas with a south- ern exposure; however, this was not the case on north-facing sites dueto the presence of ground frost ator near the surface. Itis worth noting that a photograph canbe an exceptionally useful tool in documenting many aspects ofa fire’s behavior. * Time is central daylight time.
Bythe evening ofMay 1, crews were able to secure a fireline com- pletely around the fire using both natural fuelbreaks and constructed fireguards. A major suppression effort onMay 2, which included the use of three CL–215 water bombers, prevented any further flare-ups from occurring and effec- tively brought the fire under con- trol. Fire weather observations and fire danger indexes: Fire weather information was not available from the Manitoba Natural Resources office at Rennie, buta number of other sources were used to establish the conditions that existed before (table 1) and during the fire runon May1. This included the 1300-hour observa- tions from the fire weather stations at West Hawk Lake and Nutimik Lake; the hourly readings onMay 1 from the AES stations at Kenora, Winnipeg, and Sprague, Manitoba; and estimates ofthe conditions bythe suppression staff atthe fire. At 1700 hours, during the May 1 fire run, the fire weather and fire dan- ger condition observations provided in table 2 were made by fire sup- pression personnel and substantiat- ed with data from the AES weather stations. Topography and fuel type characteristics: The fire area is situated atan eleva- tion of1,082 feet (330m) above mean sea level. The terrain isgen- tly undulating and had a minimal effect onthe fire’s behavior. The fuel types in this area were pri- marily mature jack pine (FBP System Fuel Type C–3) with some small stands of boreal spruce (C–2) and trembling aspen prior to leaf flush (D–1). The forest inventory information for the area within the perimeter ofthe fire has been broadly categorized according tothe FBP System fuel type classifica- tion. Amap depicting these fuel types is shown in figure 1. Observations by Suppression Personnel During wildfires, suppression per- sonnel are often inthe best posi- tion to make fire behavior observa- tions. This was true atthe Brereton The most significant fire weather parameter to measure during a major fire runis windspeed and direction. Figure 1—Fire Behavior Prediction System fuel type and fire progress map for the Brereton Lake Fire, May1, 1988.
Lake Fire. The efforts ofthe sup- pression staff resulted inthe collec- tion of useful data. Information of this type serves many purposes such asuse at postfire boards of review and verification ofthe FBP System relationships. Operational staff should be encouraged to make similar observations inthe future. Reference Alexander, M.E.; Lanoville, R.A. 1987. Wildfires asa source of fire behavior data: A case study from Northwest Territories, Canada. In: Proceedings ofthe Ninth Conference on Fire and Forest Meteorology; 1987 April 21–24; San Diego, CA. Postprint volume. Boston, MA: American Meteorological Society: 86–93. Alexander, M.E.; Lawson, B.D.; Stocks, B.J.; Van Wagner, C.E. 1984. User guide tothe Canadian Forest Fire Behavior Prediction System: Rate of spread relationships. Interim edition. Environment Canada, Canadian Forest Service Fire Danger Group. Lawson, B.D.; Stocks, B.J.; Alexander, M.E.; Van Wagner, C.E. 1985. A system for pre- dicting fire behavior in Canadian forests. In: Donoghue, L.R.; Martin, M.E., eds. Proceedings ofthe Eighth Conference on Fire and Forest Meteorology; 1985 April 29–May2; Detroit, MI. SAF Pub. 85–04. Bethesda, MD: Society of American Foresters: 6–16. ■ For documentation purposes, details onthe topography and fuel type mosaic inthe fire area can often be described after the fire has occurred. Date ºFºC (%) mphkm/hin mm FFMC DMCDC ISI BUI FWI04/2136 2.073 7.812.50 083 30236 3.146 904/2238 3.572 0.91.50 083 31238 1.746 504/2343 6.049 4.37.00 084 31240 2.747 804/2449 9.547 7.812.50 086 33243 4.349 1204/2538 3.586 8.113.00.194.744 22235 0.135 004/2642 5.545 5.69.00.010.165 23237 0.836 104/2750 10.033 9.014.50 081 24239 2.539 604/2864 18.019 10.316.50 091 28244 11.344 2304/2972 22.018 7.812.50 094 33249 13.649 2704/3072 22.032 9.916.00 093 36254 14.454 3005/0173 22.540 17.127.50 091 40260 20.958 39FWI System components b 1300-hr weather observations aa. Observations from the West Hawk Lake (1,085 feet [331m] above m.s.l.) and Nutimik Lake (991 feet [302m] above m.s.l.) fireweather stations were averaged to obtain the values for the Brereton Lake area. These stations are operated by Manitoba Natural Resources and located approximately 19 miles (30km) southeast and north ofthe fire area, respectively. b. FFMC = Fire Fuel Moisture Code; DMC = Duff Moisture Code; DC = Drought Code; ISI = Initial Spread Index; BUI = Buildup Index; and FWI = Fire Weather Index. FWI System calculations began on April 21 with the following moisture code starting values: FFMC = 85; DMC = 30; andDC = 235. 1700-hour fire weather observations:a Temperature………………………. 79ºF (26.0ºC) Relative humidity…………………. 21% Wind………………………………. SSE19 mph (30km/h) Days since rain b………………….. 6 Adjusted FWI System values: Fire Fuel Moisture Code………….. 91 Initial Spread Index………………..22.4 Fire Weather Index………………...42a. Estimates were made by fire suppression personnel and substantiated with data from the AES weather stations at Kenora, 47 miles (75km) east, 1,348 feet (411m) above m.s.l.; Winnipeg, 75 miles (120km) west, 784 feet (239m) above m.s.l.; and Sprague, 56 miles (90km) south, 1,079 feet (329m) above m.s.l. b. Greater than 0.02 inches (0.6mm). Table 1—Fire weather and fire danger conditions that preceded the occurrence ofthe 1988 Brereton Lake Fire. Table 2—Fire weather and fire danger conditions during a major fire runon the Brereton Lake Fire, May1, 1988. Temperature Relative humidity Wind Rain
Observations of horizontal roll vortices (HRVs) are well docu- mented for intense wildland fires occurring on flat terrain (Haines 1984; Haines and Smith 1987). However, there have been no reported observations of HRVs associated with complex terrain. Haines and Hutchinson (1988) sug- gested that the additional atmos- pheric turbulence caused by rough terrain might dominate the balance of fluid forces necessary for HRVs and quickly destroy formations. However, we conclude that HRVs did form during an intense Mon- tana wildland fire ona mountain face that was observed bythe jun- ior author. This article describes the phenomenon. What Are HRVs? HRVs are bent over, very slowly rotating fire whirls that typically form as pairs. HRVs sometimes col- lapse outside ofthe fireline, drop- ping firebrands on suppression crews (Haines and Hutchinson 1988). They are, therefore, a threat to personnel working the flanks, especially near the head ofthe fire. HRVs form most often during extreme burning conditions with unstable air and light winds. Higher windspeeds and crossflows cause increased turbulence, which, in turn, causes HRVs to break up. We found that fires with HRVs were among the most intense ever encountered by firefighters. Horizontal vortices are common features of fluids, including the atmosphere. However, unlike verti- cal vortices, such as tornadoes or most fire whirls that spin rapidly, the angular velocity ofa horizontal vortex is quite low. HRVs that form in fires develop vertically but bend over easily in light to moderate winds. They typically form as coun- terrotational pairs ator near the head ofa fire and look like slowly rolling cylinders of smoke, flame, and ash, akin to lazy tornadoes lying on their sides (Haines and Hutchinson 1988). Fire-generated HRVs, which may spiral outto the sides while moving downwind, are related to other fluid phenomena: the slow swirls ofair inthe atmos- phere that cause long parallel lines of clouds called “cloud streets” as well asthe helical motions in lakes that cause the formation of parallel lines of surface debris. The Hellgate Fire The Hellgate Fire began near Missoula, MT, during late afternoon on July 12, 1985. When a suppres- sion crew arrived onthe scene 17 minutes after ignition, the fire had already increased to5 acres (2ha). Fire behavior included 10-foot (3- m) flame lengths along with crowning and spotting. An8-mile- per-hour (13-km/h) southwest wind aided fire spread from the ignition point ina valley bottom, upa canyon face with a50-percent slope. A temperature of98 ºF (37ºC) anda relative humidity of12 percent resulted in rapid fire spread in cured grass. Fuels inthe ignition area were classed as Fuel Model 1in the Fire Behavior System (Anderson 1982). The fire was not controlled until July 18 after 1,568 acres (635ha) of forest land had burned. More than 900 firefighters were involved, as well as23 ground tankers, 8doz- ers, 4 rotary-wing aircraft, and2 fixed-wing air tankers. In total, the strong containment effort indicates the intensity of this fire. H ORIZONTAL ROLL V ORTICES INC OMPLEX T ERRAIN * Donald A. Haines andL. Jack Lyon * The article is reprinted from Fire Management Notes 51(2) [Spring 1990]: 15–17. When this article was originally published, Donald Haines wasa research meteorolo- gist for the USDA Forest Service, North Central Forest Experimentation Station, East Lansing, MI; and Jack Lyon wasa supervisory research wildlife biologist for the USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station, Forestry Sciences Laboratory, Missoula, MT. Horizontal roll vortices sometimes collapse outside ofthe fireline, dropping firebrands on suppression crews working the flanks ofa fire. Figure 1—Terrain and progress ofthe Hellgate Fire onthe late afternoon of July 15. The arrows onthe right indicate the direction ofthe main fire spread along a north–south front (A–A’). The fire had reached the ridge line (B–A) above the Hellgate north face. Spot fires (S1and S2) then began a simultaneous runto the ridge, their smoke columns forming hori- zontal roll vortices.
Description ofHRV Activity HRVs formed during late afternoon on July 15. Observations were made from a distance of3 miles (5km) looking south–southeast. The fire had spread horizontally along a canyon wall (fig. 1, A–A’) and had reached the ridge line (fig. 1, B–A). A firebrand from the ridge caused a spot fire in unburned timber tothe east ofthe main fire (fig. 1, S1). The area of this spot fire increased rapidly, causing downhill airflow from the ridge. This activity appar- ently caused a second spot fire (fig. 1, S2). The two spot fire areas both crowned in Douglas-fir and lodge- pole pine, and then began a simul- taneous runup the Hellgate north face tothe main ridge (fig. 1, B–A). This fire activity took place about midslope ona steep hillside with a vertical rise of2,600 feet (790m) from the canyon floor tothe ridge. The two columns, each about 300 feet (90m) in diameter, began to slowly rotate (fig. 2). Banding and rotation of smoke showed that air- flow inthe left column (fig. 2, L) turned clockwise, while airflow inthe right column (fig. 2, R) rotated counterclockwise (fig. 3). Flames were also an integral part ofthe columns, although they are not apparent infig. 3. The space between the two smoke columns was relatively smoke free. This suggests that the major source of oxygen to sustain these fire columns descended from above into the open area (300 feet [90m] wide) between them and spread both left and right near the surface to feed the two columns (fig. 2). The fire continued this behavior until the two columns reached the ridge. At that point, erratic fire behavior dominated and the two columns stopped rotating. Implications Because ofthe complex airflow and resulting turbulence, HRVs donot form as easily in rough terrain as they do over flat land. However, the behavior exhibited bythe Hellgate Fire shows that these fluid struc- tures can form in complex topogra- phy. Ina typical situation, a single smoke column separates into two columnar vortices. Inthe Hellgate Fire, HRV formation was aided bytwo well-defined spot fires that pro- duced two columns. The final results are the same in either situa- tion. References Anderson, H.E. 1982. Aids to determining fuel models for estimating fire behavior. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT–122. Ogden, UT: USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. Haines, D.A. 1987. Horizontal vortices and the New Miner Fire. Fire Management Notes. 48(4): 26–28. Haines, D.A.; Hutchinson, J. 1988. Vortices in wildland fire. [A14-minute videotape.] St. Paul, MN: USDA Forest Service, North Central Forest Experiment Station. Haines, D.A.; Smith, M.C. 1987. Three types of horizontal vortices observed in wild- land mass and crown fires. Journal of Climate and Applied Meteorology. 26(12): 1624–1637. ■ Horizontal roll vortices form most often during extreme burning conditions with unstable air and light winds over flat topography. Figure 2—Suggested airflow into and around the columns onthe Hellgate north face. Airflow inthe left column (S1) turned clockwise, while airflow inthe right column (S2) rotated counterclock- wise. Oxygen descended from above into the open area between the columns and spread left and right to feed the columns. Figure 3—The two smoke columns onthe Hellgate north face, showing counterrotation- al banding as well asthe clear area between the columns..
FIRE B EHAVIOR INH IGH -E LEVATION T IMBER * Mark Beighley and Jim Bishop The Fayette Fire was started by lightning on August 21, 1988, near Fayette Lake, onthe Pinedale Ranger District ofthe Bridger–Teton National Forest. On August 24, a major fire run over- took Spike Camp 2. Government and personal gear was lost, butno personal injuries were reported. The fire was controlled on September 14at a final size of38,507 acres (15,500ha). Unruly Fire Behavior It became evident early inthe inci- dent that standard fire prediction methods, based onthe procedures taught usat the Fire Behavior Analyst course (S–590) at NARTC (National Advanced Resource Technology Center, Marana, AZ), were not applicable tothe kind of fire behavior we were experiencing onthe Fayette Fire. The fire did not spread continuously in surface fuelbeds. Torching, crowning, and spotting were common. In fact they were not just incidental, they were absolutely essential tothe movement ofthe fire. Adjusting the fire model outputs bythe useof recommended correction factors also provided unsatisfactory results. Fire spread rates and intensities were extremely sensitive to small variations in fire environ- * The article is reprinted from Fire Management Notes 51(2) [Spring 1990]: 23–28. When this article was originally published, Mark Beighley wasa fire management officer for the USDA Forest Service, Deschutes National Forest, Bend Ranger District, Bend, OR; and Jim Bishop wasa State forest ranger, California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection, Butte Ranger Unit, Oroville, CA. important factors such as humidity and wind. Matching fire behavior “activity levels” with fire history data allowed usto make serviceable spread rate predictions. When weather predictions held true, our forecasts of fire intensity, forward spread rates, and fire perimeter increase proved reasonably accu- rate. The fire behavior information developed was incorporated into the tactical decision making [logo: Forest Service and CDF (take from FMN56(3), p. 17)] It became evident early inthe incident standard fire prediction methods were not applicable tothe kind of fire behavior we were experiencing onthe Fayette Fire. mental factors, with quantum steps upor down in spread rate and intensity from small changes of relative humidity or wind. We began to look carefully atthe fire behavior, noting details ofhow the fire spread and monitoring the fire environment. Initially an attempt was made to measure spread rates that would allow usto calibrate fire behavior model out- puts. Eventually we classified and correlated the fire behavior with Office for the firm of Beighley, Bishop, and Berkovitz.
process and interpreted inthe Incident Action Plan for fireline overhead and firefighters, allowing them to anticipate large increases in fire intensity. The fire burned mostly within the Bridger Wilderness onthe south- west flank ofthe Wind River Mountains in Wyoming. Elevations onthe fire ranged from 8,000to over 10,000 feet (2,400–3,000m). Most ofour information relates to elevations between 9,000 and 10,000 feet (2,700–3,000m), the zones ofthe fire that remained most active during our tenure from August 24 through September 16, 1988. Description ofthe Fire Environment The environment in which the Fayette Fire took place provided a combination of variables that resulted ina broad range of fire behavior extremes, from total inac- tivity to conflagration. The fuels were predominantly mature to overmature lodgepole pine and subalpine fir stands with a high standing dead component. The density ofthe timber stands varied greatly from nearly closed canopies to scattered stringers of timber on mostly rocky sites. Ground fuels consisted ofa light to moderate dead-and-down compo- nent of windfallen tree boles with many decomposed logs. A large portion ofthe understory area was carpeted with grouse whortleberry, a4- to8-inch (10- to20-cm) high herbaceous plant, portions of which were dead. Duff and litter were deep in rocky areas where fallen needles concentrated in crevices, and shallow, less than one-quarter inch (0.6cm), on flatter, less bro- ken terrain. The surface fuel com- plex tended tobe discontinuous over most ofthe area. The terrain varied from well- defined drainages with a60-percent slope onthe lower elevations (8,000to 9,500 feet [2,400–2,900m]) to flatter but more broken terrain, dotted with small pothole lakes at higher elevations (9,500to 10,500 feet [2,400–3,200m]). A wide variety of weather condi- tions were experienced. Torching, crowning, and spotting were not just incidental, they were absolutely essential tothe movement ofthe fire. The Continental Divide became the final fireline stopping the Fayette Fire. Horseshoe Lake isin the foreground. Ignition of tree crowns would occur within minutes ofthe initiating spot fire. Typical fuelbed of discontinuous ground fuels and lots of jackstrawed timber, viewed from the air.
Temperatures approaching 80 °F (27ºC) and relative humidities inthe 10- to12-percent range occurred on several days, with winds upto 30 miles per hour (48km/h). During the period from September 10to 12, measurable precipitation fell, with high tem- peratures inthe 30’s (–1to 4 °C) and minimum relative humidities inthe 50’sand 60’s (10to 20 °C). Several cold fronts passed through the fire area, andon one occasion strong east winds upto 40 miles per hour (64km/h) developed unexpectedly. Fire Behavior Observations Fire behavior inthe previously described fuelbed was observed at close range on several occasions, for periods totaling approximately 30to 40 hours. In addition to visu- al observation, measurements were made of spread rates, spotting dis- tances, and time required foran initiating spot fire to generate enough heat to ignite tree crowns and start new spot fires. Simul- taneously, observations were made of relative humidity, temperature, wind, and slope. The following description of fire behavior begins with conditions atthe low end ofthe scale of fire activity and pro- gresses to more severe conditions and higher levels of activity. Low-Level Activity. The daily cycle of fire activity begins with a previ- ous day’s holdover fire that is burn- ingin heavy, dead-and-down fuels. No spread is sustained overnight inthe fine surface fuels, and even smoldering inthe duff is minimal, much ofit having gone out during the night when it reached thinner areas. Asthe day progresses and increasing temperatures and decreasing relative humidity lower fine fuel moisture, the fire begins to burn more intensely in heavy dead fuels, andit spreads into adja- cent lighter fuels including dead, attached branches of trees; low- growing live evergreens such as juniper and lower portions ofsub- alpine fir; and smaller dead-and- down material. Any spread into fine surface fuels at this point is limited to areas immediately adjacent to flaming, larger dead fuels. Eventually heat builds up under a tree canopy, fire climbs the ladder fuels (which are abundant), and the tree or compact cluster of trees The environment in which the Fayette Fire took place provided a combination of variables resulting ina broad range of fire behavior extremes, from total inactivity to conflagration. View ofthe Fayette Fire from the Pinedale, WY, perspective on August 25, 1988. Heavy down logs loaded drainage bottoms. These drainages formed wicks which propa- gated loaded fire spread.
torches out. This kind of sporadic torching commonly begins bymid- morning, earlier on drier days and later on more humid days. When the radiant heat from the torching trees is available to boost the fire, it spreads inthe fine sur- face fuels. Asthe surface fire spreads away and the radiant heat diminishes, the fine surface fuels generally goout. Occasionally a small “run” takes place inthe whortleberry butit requires a little wind and slope to keep it going. One such run measured 9 chains (594 feet [181m]) per hour (of slope 15 percent, midflame wind of3 miles per hour [5km/h], anda relative humidity of17 percent). Often the flanks of such runs goout and only the head keeps burning. Torching tree crowns toss out fire- brands to distances inthe 100- to200-foot (30- to60-m) range. The more potent firebrands are com- monly branch tips approximately one-quarter inch (0.6cm) in diam- eter and fir cones. Firebrands shower an area downwind, but only a small fraction ignite new fires. Nearly all the active spot fires arein dead material inall stages of decay, from sound to decomposed wood. Firebrands landing in sparse grass, grouse whortleberry, or sparse needle litter usually donot light the material butif they do, the new fire goes out quickly. The spot fires positioned under aer- ial fuels begin to increase in inten- sity until the ladder fuels are ignit- ed. Common ladder fuels area low bushy juniper that grows under the lodgepole pine, the lower foliage of subalpine fir, and dead branches attached tothe lower portions of trees. The time fora spot fire to build sufficient intensity to torch out new crowns varies widely and depends alot onthe details ofhow the fuels receiving the firebrand are positioned relative tothe ladder fuels. However, the time to crown torching is frequently an interval of20 to90 minutes. We have termed the activity described above as “low-level.” The torching is sporadic and isolated. No fire is sustained in surface fuels or crowns. Occasionally, where continuous fuels are positioned upslope or downwind of torching crowns, sluggish crown fire will move a short distance inthe trees. The crowning overall would be classified as “passive.” Perimeter advance in areas of continuing activity rarely exceeds 0.3 mile (0.5km) during a burn period. Ground fire spread alone became such an insignif- icant component that the use ofthe standard fire behavior spread model was abandoned. Spot fire beginning to spread into surrounding fuel. Typical spot fire scenario. Spotting, upto 11/ 2 miles (2.4ha) ahead ofthe front, was common. Typical ember landing in grouse whortle- berry to start spot fires ahead ofthe main front.
Moderate-Level Activity. Ata level we have termed “moderate,” the torching of crowns in isolated trees or small groups of trees is already occurring. Akey process in raising the overall level of activity isthe maintenance of fire spread inthe surface fuels. Even inthe more severe condi- tions, spread in fine surface fuels is minimal and limited until itis aided bythe radiant heat provided by torching trees or flaming, heavy, dead fuels. Fire inthe surface fuels then spreads until it reaches new trees. Some time is required for the new trees to torch out. However, more-or-less continuous crown fire activity can involve patches of trees upto an acre ortwo (0.4or 0.8ha) in size before it dies away. The activity dies out when surface fuel discontinuity prohibits the contin- ued involvement ofnew trees in torching. The crowning at this point is still essentially passive and dependent upon spread inthe sur- face fuels. This isin contrast to that which occurs inlow-level activity, which depends more onthe preheating of canopies over individual spot fires andis not dependent on surface fire spread. Spotting activity continues, of course, and reaches outto approxi- mately one-quarter mile (0.4km). Atthe upper endof moderate-level activity, crown fire runs are sus- tained that usually end when they reach the top ofthe slope. During these runs, the fire spread insur- face fuels, driven by radiant heat Fire spread predictions were made using a combi- nation of maximum spotting distances and the probability that a certain level of fire activity would occur for that day. Predicting Fire Behavior—The Skillful Artof Combining the Past With the Present To Determine the Future The Fayette Fire demanded something extra from fire behavior analyst—on-the-line fire prediction improvi- sation. Spotting was not just incidental tothe fire, itwas an essential element to fire spread. What was the environment like where this fire burned?—overmature lodgepole pine and subalpine fir where at some points canopies were nearly closed andat others stringers of timber trailed through rocky sites, terrain ranging from well-defined drainages to flatter broken terrain, anda wide variety of weather conditions. Combining maximum spot fire distances with the probable level of fire activity for the day (determined largely by relative humidity and wind) finally proved the successful method of predicting fire spread. Fire behavior analyst takes spread rate measurements and observations onan initiating spot fire. Dead logs under ladder fuel complex. Ignition under low relative humidity con- ditions caused instant torching of crowns.
from burning crowns, keeps pace with the crown fire. Short-range spotting, within a zone extending approximately 15 feet (5m) ahead ofthe flame front in surface fuels, aids surface spread. There isan essential, mutually reinforcing interaction between the radiant heat from crowns impinging on surface fuels and the heating ofnew crowns bythe spreading sur- face fire. The entire fuel complex is aflame, including surface fuel already blackened by passage ofthe surface flaming front, ground to crowns. This is classified asan “active” crown fire. One such runon slightly sloping terrain with 8- to12-mile-per-hour (13- to19- km/h) winds moved at100 chains (6,600 feet [2,012m]) per hour. Spotting reaches outto one-half mile (0.8km). New long-range spots donot usually spawn new crown runs of significant propor- tions. They commonly trigger torching and crown fire over small areas. Fire spread during the burn period typically amounts to three- quarters ofa mile (1.2km). High-Level Activity. On days of “high-level” activity, active crown fire is usually occurring by early afternoon. Low humidities make sustained spread in fine surface fuels prevalent. Without the low humidities and attendant, continu- ously advancing surface fire, con- tinuous crowning cannot be main- tained. Major runs often develop in zones “seeded” with spot fires by previous days’ activity. Significant areas (tens or hundreds of acres) become involved in active crown fire within afew tens of minutes, and major runs take off, driven by wind or slope. When winds reach approxi- mately 15 miles per hour (24km/h), some independent crowning takes place. Crown fire moves out ahead ofthe surface fire, at least for awhile. Without higher winds, the independent crown runs are usually narrow and not sustained. Long-range spotting reaches outto three-quarters ofa mile (1.2km), perhaps more in extreme cases. The long-range spots build rapidly enough to initiate new major crown runs. The fire moves across ridges and basins, with an advance of3 miles (5km) ina burning peri- od being typical. Summary. In summary, the salient features of each activity level are described as follows: • Low—Overall spread is main- tained by torching and spotting. Surface fire spread does not aid crowning. • Moderate—Spread is sustained by surface fire, active crowning takes place, but independent crowning is rare and long-range spotting does not give rise tonew major runs. • High—Active crowning iscom- mon, and independent crowning becomes important. Long-range spotting can initiate new major crown runs. Prediction Procedures Itis obvious that the mechanism of spread on this fire violated most ofthe basic assumptions on which the fire spread model is built (that is, no crowning, spotting, or fire whirls; uniform, continuous fuelbed; and source of ignition no longer influencing fire). Occasion- ally fire spread was limited tosur- face fuels, specifically inthe grouse whortleberry and dead-and-down fuel component. Spread rates using Northern Forest Fire Laboratory Fuel Model No. 10 were well within the range of acceptance for such fire spread. But, overall, ground fire spread alone became such an insignificant component in predict- ing overall perimeter movement and fire intensity that the use ofthe standard fire behavior spread model was abandoned. The spot fire program inthe BEHAVE System was very useful in predicting maxi- mum spot fire distances. Fire spread predictions were made using a combination of maximum spotting distances and the proba- bility that a certain level of fire activity would occur for that day. The level of activity and consequent spread rate were closely correlated totwo primary factors, relative humidity and wind. To oversimplify a little, the humidity basically determined the level of activity achieved bythe fire, and the wind dictated the spread produced by that activity. Without low humidi- ties to accelerate the torching process, the fire was confined to limited spread inthe surface fuels, with modest spotting. On several occasions, high winds, 30to 40 miles per hour (48–64km/h), failed to produce significant fire spread inthe presence of humidities over 20 percent. The wind’s major contri- bution was twofold: • Provides the horizontal trajectory component necessary to trans- port firebrands well ahead ofthe crown fire. • When the relative humidity con- ditions supported active crown- ing, provides the horizontal thrust necessary to convert an active crown fire into an inde- pendent crown fire.
The basic activity level was deter- mined bythe combinations of humidity and wind that are sum- marized inthe matrix illustrated in table 1. Topography and fuel conti- nuity inthe active fire areas were considered and used to modify our initial judgments, upor down. Not Exactly bythe Book The fire prediction approach out- lined above, though not refined, was workable ina situation that defied the conventional approach. We were able to provide useful guidance tothe planners andto the firefighting crews. Some Useful Advice—Observe, Analyze, and Apply. We hope that some of what we have reported is useful to others dealing with fires that have similarities tothe Fayette Fire. Atthe least, we encourage the general approach we took on this fire. Begin with careful observa- tion, continue with analysis of what is seen, and apply what is learned. Clearinghouse for Fire Behavior Analysis. We encourage comment and input that relates tothe infor- mation in this report. Further- more, we would like tosee the fire behavior analysis ofa given inci- dent routinely summarized and shared with other analysts. The report should address the general nature ofthe fire behavior, verifica- tion, measurements, the adequacy ofthe prediction system, and any techniques developed to improve prediction capability. Perhaps a central repository and clearing- house could be created to make available or distribute the informa- tion. ■ Note: L = low-level activity, M = moderate-level activity, andH = high-level activity. Table 1—Fire activity level matrix. Relative humidity (percent) 0–55–1010–1515–2525+ 10–13M–HHHHH 14–16MMM–HHH17–19LL–MMMM–H20–25LLL–ML–MM25–30 LLLLL–M30+ LLLLL Wind speed (miles per hour)
The growth of wildfires is related to three broad factors: fuel type, topography, and weather. The National Fire Danger Rating System and the Fire Behavior Prediction System combine these factors to predict the probability and severity of wildland fires. However, these systems have mixed results in predicting extreme fire behavior conditions characterized by intense crowning and spotting. Extreme fire behavior is rare, but when it occurs, fires burn with intense heat and spread rapidly, endangering life and property. An atmospheric index, the Lower Atmospheric Severity Index (LASI) developed in 1988 by Donald Haines, a research meteorologist with the USDA Forest Service, addresses the problem ofhow weather promotes extreme fire behavior conditions. This index uses the environmental lapse rate (temperature difference) within a layer ofair coupled with its mois- ture content to determine a LASI number. This paper compares the values of LASI orthe Haines Index, aswe will call it, with what occurred on recent large Idaho fires inan attempt to determine its predictive capabilities with regard to large fire growth. Haines Index— Background Information Research conducted earlier on fires inthe Eastern United States had identified unstable air and low moisture as major contributors to fire severity. Haines contacted wild- land fire management units throughout the country requesting information on their worst fire sit- uations over a20-year period. Information was received from 30 States regarding 29 major fires inthe West and45 fires inthe East. Data from oneto three radiosonde stations closest to each fire were examined to determine air-mass lapse rates and moisture values over the fires. (Radiosonde weather stations launch instrumented bal- loons that measure atmospheric temperature, relative humidity, pressure, and wind.) The 0000 Greenwich Mean Time/1800 moun- tain daylight time (MDT) tempera- ture and dewpoint profile for the evenings on which the fires were reported were constructed for one of three layers between 950 and 500 millibars (approximately 2,000 and 18,000 feet [600–5,500m] above mean sea level [msl]), depending upon the elevation ofthe fire. Dueto large differences in elevation across the United States, three combinations of atmospheric layers were used to construct the LASI. Figure 1 shows amap ofthe United States divided into three regional HE AINES NDEX AND DAHO W ILDFIRE G ROWTH * Paul Werth and Richard Ochoa The Haines Index isthe first attempt to construct a formal fire-weather index based upon features ofthe lower atmosphere. Does it work? When this article was originally published, Paul Werth and Richard Ochoa were fire weather meteorologists for the National Weather Service, Boise, ID. * The article is reprinted from Fire Management Notes 51(4) [Fall 1990]: 9–13. A related article, “Evaluation of Idaho Wild-Fire Growth Using the Haines Index and Water Vapor Imagery,” appeared inthe proceedings ofthe Fifth Conference of Mountain Meteorology; 1990 June 25–29; Boulder, CO, Boston, MA: American Meteorological Society: 187–193. Figure 1—Mapof the United Stales divided into three regional elevations (Haines 1988).
elevations. Much ofthe Eastern United States, excluding the Appalachian Mountains, uses alow- elevation index computed from 950–850 millibar data (approxi- mately 2,000 and 5,000 feet [600–1,500m] msl). Amid-eleva- tion index was developed for the Great Plains and the Appalachian Mountains using 850–700 millibar data (approximately 5,000 and 10,000 feet [1,500–3,000m] msl). A high-elevation index is used for the mountainous Western United States using 700–500 millibar data (approximately 10,000 and 18,000ft [3,000–5,500m] msl). Comparing large fires and nearby upper air data, Haines developed his Lower Atmospheric Severity Index, which indicates the potential for large fire growth. Temperature lapse rate—stability—and moisture values are combined, resulting inthe Haines index using: Haines Index = Stability + Moisture = (Tp1 – Tp2 ) + (Tp1 – Tdp1 ) = A + B where Tis the temperature attwo pressure surfaces (p1 ,p2 ); andTp 1and Tdp1 are the dry bulb tempera- ture and dewpoint temperature ata lower level. All temperature values are written in centigrade. Illustrated in table 1are the lapse rate and moisture limits used inthe low-, mid-, and high-elevation Haines Indexes. The Haines Index equals the sum of factor A (stability) and factor B (moisture): Haines Index Class ofday (A + B) (potential for large fire) 2or 3 very low4 low5 moderate 6 high Haines found that only 10 percent of large fires occurred when the class ofday was very low (Haines Index 2or 3) though 62 percent ofthe fire-season days fell inthe very low class. Forty-five percent ofthe fires were associated with the high- class days (Haines Index 6), while only 6 percent ofthe days fell in that class. Instability and dry air are key parameters that must be present to result ina high Haines Index num- Extreme fire behavior was exhibited when the Haines Index was5 or6, but when the index low- ered to4 or less, fire activity significantly diminished. Figure 3—Mapof Idaho with wildfire loca- tion. Figure 2—Typical synoptic situation that produces a moderate to high Haines Index value. Elevation Stability term Moisture term Low 950–850mb °T850 mb °T – dewpoint A= 1 when 3 °Cor less B= 1 when 5 °Cor less A= 2 when 4–7 °CB= 2 when 6–9 °CA=3when 8 °Cor more B= 3 when 10 °Cor more Mid 850–700mb °T850 mb °T – dewpoint A= 1 when 5 °Cor less B= 1 when 5 °Cor less A= 2 when 6–10 °CB= 2 when 6–12 °CA= 3 when 11 °Cor more B= 3 when 13 °Cor more High 700–500mb °T700 mb °T – dewpoint A= 1 when 17 °Cor less B= 1 when 14 °Cor less A= 2 when 18–21 °CB= 2 when 15–20 °CA= 3 when 22 °Cor more B= 3 when 21 °Cor more Table 1—Stability and moisture limits inthe low-, mid-, and high-eleva- tion Haines indexes.
ber. Instability canbe caused by either warming the lower levels ofthe airmass orby cooling the upper levels. When warming below and cooling aloft occur atthe same time, the airmass rapidly destabi- lizes. Inthe Western United States, this occurs when cooling, associat- ed with an upper trough oflow pressure, moves over a surface thermal trough or “heat low.” An increase in moisture usually accompanies the upper trough, butat times a “tongue” of very dry air wraps around the leading edge ofthe upper trough resulting inlow relative humidities atthe surface. Figure 2 displays a typical weather pattern that produces a high Haines Index inthe Western United States: a thermal trough atthe sur- face, a500-millibar trough moving onto the West Coast, anda “tongue” ofdry air across the Sierra Nevada Range into the Great Basin and Northern Rockies. This isthe classic pattern associated with the “breakdown ofthe 500-mil- libar ridge.” Nimchuk and Janz (1984) state that the breakdown ofthe 500-mil- libar ridge is clearly associ- ated with severe wildfire behavior. However, not every “break- down ofthe 500-millibar ridge” will produce extreme fire weather con- ditions—both instability and dry air must be present. Haines has addressed these two parameters in developing his index. Idaho Wildfires and the Haines Index The Haines Index isthe first attempt to construct a formal fire- weather index based upon features ofthe lower atmosphere. Does it work? To answer that question, wildfires in central Idaho (fig. 3) were investigated inan attempt to correlate the Haines Index and large fire growth. Oneof these wildfires was the devastating Lowman Fire of late July and early August of 1989. The Lowman Fire. The Lowman Fire was one of many fires that started onthe Boise National Forest during an outbreak ofdry lightning on July 26, 1989. The fire spread only a short distance the fol- lowing day, butby July 28, fire activity began to increase. Extreme burning conditions developed the afternoon of July 29 (see fig. 4). Crowning and spotting pushed the fire 5.75 miles (9.25km) tothe northeast. The fire burned through the eastern edge ofthe small town of Lowman destroying 25 buildings anda number of vehicles and clos- ing State Highway 21. All residents of Lowman were evacuated. Fortu- nately there were no injuries or deaths. The fire continued to spread toward the northeast during the next 3 days, butat a lower rate. Cooler temperatures and higher relative humidities moved over the fire August 2 with very little acreage lost after that date. The size ofthe Lowman Fire (over 46,000 acres [19,000ha]), its extreme fire behavior, and the loss of homes and personal belongings will make the Lowman Fire oneto remember for many years. The rate of spread (ROS) exhibited bythe Lowman Fire is plotted against the Haines Index in figure 5. Onthe morning of July 29 (from Between July and September, the Haines Index showed a high potential for large fire growth on only 6 percent ofthe days—and those accounted for over 75 percent ofthe burned acreage. Figure 5—Haines Index compared with rate of spread for the Lowman Fire, July 27to August 5, 1989. Key: 6 = high, 5 = moder- ate, 4 = low, and2–3 = very low. Figure 4—Late afternoon satellite picture showing large smoke plumes from fires in central Idaho and northeastern Oregon.
the 0600 MDT Boise radiosonde), the Haines Index number 6 (fig. 6) indicated a high potential for large fire growth. At approximately 1400 MDT, the fire made a rapid run toward the northeast at well over 75 chains (4,950 feet [1,500m]) per hour. Temperature atthe time was between 90and 95 °F (32–35C°) with the relative humidity aslow as8 percent. Surface winds were measured at5 to10 miles per hour (8–16km/h) with occasional gusts to15 miles per hour (24km/h), but were much stronger near the fire front dueto strong indrafts into the smoke column. For the next 3 days, the Haines Index fell to5, still indicating a moderate potential for large growth. Although the ROS dropped to25 chains (1,650 feet [500m]) or less per hour, the fire continued to move too quickly to fight effective- ly. The Haines Index (fig. 7) dropped into the low-to-very low range August 2, resulting ina sig- nificant drop inthe fire’sROS (5 chains (330 feet [100m]) or less per hour). Extreme fire behavior, with crown- ing and long-range spotting, was exhibited bythe fire when the Haines Index was5 or6, but when the index lowered to4 or less, fire activity significantly diminished. 1990 Results. During the 1990 fire season, the Boise Fire Weather Office included the Haines Index inthe daily fire weather forecasts. A computer-generated mapof Haines Index values across the Western United States was also produced twice aday, based upon the 0600 and 1800 MDT upper air data. The Haines Index was then compared with the acreage burned onthe Boise Fire Weather District (south- ern Idaho, western Wyoming, and extreme southeastern Oregon) tosee if there wasa correlation between days in which the index wasin the high category and the occurrence of large fires. Between July and September, the Haines Index was6 (high potential for large fire growth) on only 6 percent ofthe days. Over 75per- cent ofthe burned acreage occurred on these days. The Haines Index was2, 3, or4 (very lowor low potential) on68 percent ofthe days. Only 7 percent ofthe acreage burned on those days. Needless tosay, fire activity onthe Boise Fire Weather District in 1990 verified the Haines Index. Summary The Haines Index, which combines values for instability and dry air, isa valuable indicator ofthe potential for large fire growth. Dry air affects fire behavior by lowering fuel mois- ture, which results in more fuel available for the fire andby in- creasing the probability of spotting. Instability affects fire behavior by enhancing the vertical size ofthe smoke column, resulting in strong surface winds asair rushes into the fire to replace air evacuated bythe smoke column. This isthe mecha- nism by which fires create their own wind. When the Haines Index number is5 or6, the probability of extreme fire behavior (crowning and spotting) significantly increases. Fire behav- ioris usually low, with only mini- mal fire growth, when the index number is4 or less. The Haines Index is best suited to plume-domi- nated fires: that is, fires where the power ofthe fire is greater than the power ofthe wind orthe atmos- phere. Wind isnot a parameter ofthe Haines Index. The index has yet tobe tested on fires driven by winds, such as Santa Ana and Sundowner where the power ofthe wind is greater than that ofthe fire. References Brotak, E.A. 1976. Meteorological condi- tions associated with major wildland fires. Ph.D. diss. New Haven, CT: Yale University. Davis, R.T. 1969. Atmospheric stability forecast and fire control. Fire Control Notes. 30(2): 3–4. Haines, D.A. 1988. A Lower Atmosphere Severity Index for wildland fire. National Weather Digest. 13(2): 23–27. Nimchuk, N.; Janz, B. 1984. An analysis of upper ridge breakdown in historical problem fires. Internal report. Edmonton, AB: Alberta Energy and Natural Resources Forest Service. ■ Figure 6—Haines Index map for 0600 mountain daylight time, July 29, 1989. Solid contour indicates a value of5 or greater; dashed contour, 6. (The Great Falls, MT, and Grand Junction, CO, data are missing for July 19, 1989.) Figure 7—Haines Index map for 0600 MDT, August 2, 1989. Solid contour indi- cates a value of5. (The Great Falls, MT, and Grand Junction, CO, data are missing for August 2, 1989.)
Knowledge of fire behavior is critical for those who control wildfires. Fire managers must know spread rates and intensity— not just to eventually contain and extinguish the fire but also to keep their fire control personnel safe. Managers realize that weather is paramount in importance when determining howa fire will behave. Besides affecting fuel moistures, meteorological factors also physi- cally change fire. Since fires are three-dimensional phenomena, managers need to know how the vertical structure ofthe lower atmosphere as well asthe standard surface conditions affect fire behav- ior. Haines (1988) developed a Lower Atmosphere Severity Index (LASI) for wildfires. This index combined two factors that could influence fire behavior: the vertical lapse rate and the amount of moisture inthe air. The vertical temperature structure ofthe lower atmosphere would influence the convection over the fire. Steep lapse rates, indicating instability, would enhance the con- vection over the fire, thus increas- ing the chances of extreme or erratic behavior. The amount of moisture inthe lower atmosphere isa factor that influences fuel moisture atthe surface. Low humidity values contribute to extreme fire behavior. Since the fires in Haines’ study occurred at various elevations, he used different pressure levels to indicate the low-level lapse rates. Depending onthe actual elevation ofthe fire, he used either the 950 to850 millibar (mb) temperature difference, the 850 to700 mbdif- ference, orthe 700to 500mb dif- ference. As indicators of moisture content, he used either the 850 or700 mb temperature and dewpoint difference. The actual LASI that Haines developed is shown inthe following equation: LASI = a(Tp1 – Tp2 ) + b(Tp1 – Tdp ). where Tis the temperature attwo pressure surfaces (p1, p2), Tpand Tdp are the temperature and dew- point atone ofthe levels (all tem- peratures in °Cand aand bare weighting coefficients given equal value for this study). Haines calculated LASI values for74 fires using radiosonde measure- ments at 0000 Greenwich Mean Time (GMT). In North America, these are late afternoon or early evening soundings and should usu- ally represent actual conditions when the extreme fire behavior was noted. A vast majority ofthe fires occurred on days with steep lapse rates and low humidities. Comparisons with the Standard Atmosphere and with a simple cli- matological data set computed for this study showed that these extreme fire conditions were indeed abnormal. Approximately 5 percent ofall fire season days fell into the high-index category ofthe LASI, but45 percent of days with large fires or erratic behavior were in this category. The current study differs from Haines’ work intwo ways. First, 1200 GMT data were analyzed. These are the morning soundings and would represent typical data available to fire weather forecasters who are trying to predict fire con- ditions later inthe day. As previ- ously mentioned, the LASI was developed using 0000 GMT data when extreme fire behavior was actually occurring. A goal of this study wasto seeif the instability and dryness ofthe lower atmos- phere, common during the occur- rence of extreme fire behavior, is discernible 12 hours earlier. The second difference from Haines’ study isthe analysis ofthe vertical wind profile. The effects ofthe change in wind speed with height on wildfire behav- ior have been discussed in several previous studies. Byram (1954) stressed the importance ofa low- level jet—stronger winds atlow lev- els with decreasing winds aloft. An interpretation of Byram’s work indi- * The article is reprinted from Fire Management Notes 53–54(3) [Summer 1992–93]: 23–26. When this article was originally published, Edward Brotak wasa Professor inthe Atmospheric Sciences Department, University of North Carolina–Asheville, Asheville, NC. OW EVEL EATHER ONDITIONS RECEDING M AJOR W ILDFIRES * Edward A. Brotak Since fires are three-dimensional phenomena, managers need to know how the vertical struc- ture ofthe lower atmosphere as well asthe stan- dard surface conditions affect fire behavior.
cates that hewas notas much con- cerned about an actual low-level wind maximum ashe was about minimal amounts of vertical wind shear. Ithas been long realized that a lack of vertical wind shear allows convection to develop. Such a wind profile over a wildfire would allow the convective column above the fire to develop more fully. This would increase the fire’s intensity and its potential for extreme behavior. Brotak and Reifsnyder (1977) ana- lyzed 60 fires inthe Eastern United States. They found that strong winds throughout the vertical pro- file were common andin most cases wind speeds increased with height. Although a third ofthe wind profiles in their study showed low-level jets, even in these cases, wind speeds were much stronger than the Byram model would allow for. Itwas their conclusion that fires inthe Eastern United States, which were mostly atlow eleva- tions, were primarily driven by strong winds and that convection above the fire was usually notas important. The current study examines fires at various elevations andin various terrains tosee ifany correlations exist with the vertical wind profile. Data The fires examined were the same used in Haines’ study. These con- sisted of29 major fires inthe West and45 fires inthe East. Soundings from oneto three nearby radio- sonde sites were analyzed to deter- mine both the vertical temperature and wind profiles. The 1200 GMT data were used, which represented conditions inthe morning prior tothe extreme fire behavior. To allow for the varying elevations, the country was divided into three broad regions as shown in figure 1. For much ofthe eastern part ofthe country, the 950 to850 mbtem- perature difference, the 850 mb dewpoint depression, and the sur- face to700 mb wind profile were examined. For the Appalachian Mountains and much ofthe Great Plains, the 850 to700 mb tempera- ture difference, the 850 mbdew- point depression, and the surface to600 mb wind profile were used. For the high elevations ofthe Western United States, the 700 to500 mb temperature difference, the 700 mb dewpoint depression, and the sur- face to500 mb wind profile were analyzed. The lapse rate component was broken down into three cate- gories for each level. Fora refer- ence point, the Standard Atmos- phere (NOAA and others 1976) lapse rate was used. The standard value for the 950to 850mb tem- perature difference is ~6 °C, for 850 to700 mbit is ~10 °C, and for 700to 500mb itis ~17 °C. The LASI was computed using the fol- lowing: LASI = A + BA = 1if 950–850T < 4for low- elevation fires or850–700T < 6for mid-elevation fires or700–500T < 18for high-elevation fires. A = 2if 950–850T = 4to 8for low-elevation fires or850–700T = 6to 11for mid-elevation fires or700–500T = 18to 22for high-elevation fires. A = 3if 950–850T > 8for low- elevation fires or850–700T > 11for mid-elevation fires or700–500T > 22for high-elevation fires. B = 1if 850 (T – Td ) < 6for low- and mid-elevation fires or700 (T – Td ) < 15for high- elevation fires. A goal of this study wasto seeif the instability and dryness ofthe lower atmosphere, common during the occurrence of extreme fire behavior, is discernable 12 hours earlier. Figure 1—Mapof the United States climatic divisions showing regional elevation aspects ofthe LASI.
B = 2if 850 (T – Td ) = 6to 10for low-elevation fires or6 to13 for mid-elevation fires or700 (T – Td ) = 15to 21for high-elevation fires. B = 3if 850 (T – Td ) > 8for low- elevation fires or11 for mid-elevation fires or700 (T – Td ) > 21for high-eleva- tion fires. Analysis Table 1 shows the breakdown ofthe fires into the various lapse rate, humidity, and LASI categories. The humidity component ofthe LASI, either the 850 or700 mb dewpoint depression, was comparably low for both the 1200 GMT data used in this study and the 0000 GMT data used by Haines. Therefore, dry con- ditions inthe lower atmosphere certainly seem tobe a necessary factor prior tothe occurrence of extreme fire behavior. The analysis oflow-level lapse rates did show differences between the two data sets; the 1200 GMT soundings used in this study indicated less instability. Only 14 percent ofthe low-eleva- tion soundings were decidedly unstable at 1200 GMTas compared to83 percent at 0000 GMT. The mid-elevation soundings were only slightly more unstable with 36per- cent falling into the least stable category in this study in compari- sonto 58 percent inthe Haines’ analysis. The high-elevation sound- ings showed the least difference between 1200 and 0000 GMT. In both studies, nearly 90 percent ofthe soundings showed lapse rates greater than the Standard Atmosphere rate. Low-level lapse rates are signifi- cantly affected bythe radiation budget ofthe underlying surface. At night, the surface loses heat, and the lower atmosphere is cooled from below. This produces stable lapse rates atlow levels. During the day, the surface gains energy from solar radiation, and the lower atmosphere is heated from below. This produces steep lapse rates and unstable conditions. The result of these processes isa major change inlow-level lapse rates from 1200 to 0000 GMT with the 1200 GMT sounding not being particularly representative of conditions later inthe day. The computational problems caused by radiational cooling at night could be dealt with if these effects were concentrated within a nocturnal inversion layer. Lapse rate calculations could be adjusted for some level above the top ofthe inversion. The soundings were examined specifically for the occur- rence of nocturnal inversions. The lowest levels used to calculate lapse rates were almost always above the Low-Elevation Fires (21 Fires) Lapse rate Humidity 950–850mb T850 (T – Td ) LASI < 4: 24% (4%) < 6: 10% (9%) 2–3: 14% (2%) 4–8: 62% (13%) 6–10: 19% (22%) 4: 24% (13%) > 8: 14% (83%) > 10: 71% (69%) 5: 57% (34%) 6: 5% (51%) Mid-Elevation Fires (28 Fires) Lapse rate Humidity 850–700mb T850 (T – Td ) LASI < 6: 7% (7%) < 6: 0% (9%) 2–3: 4% (6%) 6–11: 57% (35%) 6–13: 32% (31%) 4: 25% (16%) > 11: 36% (58%) > 13: 68% (60%) 5: 43% (45%) 6: 28% (33%) High-Elevation Fires (25 Fires) Lapse rate Humidity 700–500mb T700 (T – Td ) LASI < 18: 12% (13%) < 15: 4% (7%) 2–3: 4% (10%) 18–22: 48% (34%) 15–21: 24% (17%) 4: 24% (21%) >22: 40% (53%) > 21: 72% (76%) 5: 44% (24%) 6: 28% (45%) Table 1—Percentage of occurrence of fires by LASI variants for 1200 GMT soundings, with 0000 GMT data in parentheses for comparison.
nocturnal inversion. Only in three cases did the nocturnal inversion reach the 950 mb level for low-ele- vation soundings. Although nocturnal inversions were nota problem, other types of inversions were more prevalent. Fourteen ofthe soundings did dis- play low-level inversions which affected the lapse rate calculations. Strong surface heating during the day could have easily destroyed many of these inversions leading to more unstable conditions by 0000 GMT. Asa result of this, the calcu- lated LASI values were lower and were not good predictors of extreme fire behavior. As previously mentioned, only the high-elevation soundings showed consistency from 1200 to 0000 GMT. This isdue tothe location ofthe radiosonde station. Often the radiosonde station isat a much lower elevation than the fire site. The 700 mb temperature, which is considered a near surface tempera- ture for the fire site, isa “free air” reading atthe radiosonde location andis notas affected by radiational effects ofthe surface as lower tem- peratures like the 850 mb would be. The analysis ofthe 12GMT low- level wind profiles is shown in table 2. There are definite regional differ- ences in these data. Nearly three- fourths ofthe high-elevation fires inthe West occurred with light surface winds and little vertical wind shear. Again, it must be point- edout that the radiosonde sites may not truly represent conditions atthe fire location. Certainly, topo- graphic and other local effects could produce stronger surface winds inthe mountains. The lack of strong winds aloft is probably a function ofthe time of year. As shown in table 3, most ofthe western fires (high-elevation fires) occurred inthe summer when overall pressure patterns are weak. The worst conditions in terms oflow fuel moistures also usually occur under an upper-level ridge that favors weak synoptic- scale winds. Fires inthe West seem to follow Byram’s model where convection over the fire isan important factor. Almost allof the mid-elevation fires occurred when the surface winds were moderate to strong and with substantial vertical wind shear. Low-level jets were noted on33 percent ofthe sound- ings. These fires seemed tofit into Brotak and Reifsnyder’s model of wind-driven fires. The majority of these fires occurred inthe spring and fall (table 3) when weather sys- tems are stronger. Surprisingly, the low-elevation eastern fires showed no distinctive pattern inthe wind analysis. It should be remembered that surface winds usually increase from 1200 to 0000 GMT due tothe turbulent mixing during the day. Summary and Recommendations Haines’ LASI for classifying atmos- pheric conditions during periods of extreme fire behavior using 0000 GMT soundings was not as useful in predicting these conditions as when 1200 GMT data are used. The destabilization of lapse rates dueto solar heating during the day seems Table 3—Fires by elevation and month. Elevation Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Low1 — 69 21 — 21 — — — Middle — — — 122 — 5 — 41 — — High — — — — 18 49 5 — 1 — Wind profile Fire elevation Light a Moderate b Strong cLow 12 (6) (48%) 7 (4) (24%) 6 (4) (28%) Middle 1 (1) (4%) 11 (6) (46%) 12 (6) (50%) High 13 (7) (72%) 4 (2) (16%) 3 (2) (12%) a. Surface winds ≤5 knots (3m/sec); upper winds ≤25 knots (13m/sec). b. Surface winds 5to 9 knots (3–5m/sec) and/or upper winds 26to 34 knots (13–18m/sec). c. Surface winds > 9 knots (5m/sec) and/or upper winds > 34 knots (18m/sec). Table 2—Number and percentage of fire occurrence bylow-level wind profile in knots (m/sec).
tobe the main problem. One possi- ble solution would beto usea pre- dicted afternoon surface tempera- ture todo the calculations with the 1200 GMT soundings. Another pos- sibility isto compare the 1200 GMT values with climatology. This study could only useas reference points the Standard Atmosphere lapse rate and the 0000 GMT results from Haines’ study. For the most accu- rate comparisons long-term aver- ages for each radiosonde station need tobe developed. The analysis oflow-level wind pro- files also produced mixed results. In many circumstances strong sur- face winds in conjunction with low fuel moistures cause fire-control problems. Climatologically these conditions are more prevalent inthe East. Inthe West, where the lowest fuel moistures often occur inthe summer, strong winds onthe synoptic scale are rare. These fires seem tobe controlled more by local or topographically induced winds andby convection over the fire. Acknowledgment This research was funded by Cooperative Agreement Number 23-88-33of the USDA Forest Service. References Brotak, E.A.; Reifsnyder, W.E. 1977. Predicting major wildland fire occur- rence. Fire Management Notes. 38(3): 5–8. Byram, G.M. 1954. Atmospheric conditions related to blowup fires. Sta. Pap. 35. Dry Branch, GA: USDA Forest Service, Southeastern Forest Experiment Station. Haines, D.A. 1988. A lower atmospheric severity index for wildland fires. National Weather Digest. 13(2): 23–27. NOAA (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration); National Aeronautics and Space Administration; U.S. Air Force. 1976. U.S. standard atmosphere. Washington, DC. ■
After some fires, you often hear comments like this: “There wasno wayto catch that thing,” or “We couldn’t have caught that fire even ifwe’d been there when it started.” Unfor- tunately, such comments are all too often true. In southern Oregon, we started toask why that wasso and what we could do about it. Whydo we catch every fire on some days but lose control of fires right from the start on others, even when conditions are appar- ently the same? The Problem Fires The Southwest Oregon District ofthe Oregon Department of Forestry has about 2 million acres (800,000ha) anda quarter ofa million peo- ple. It ranges in elevation from about 500 feet (150m) inthe Rogue River corridor to more than 6,000 feet (1,800m) inthe Cascade and Siskiyou Mountain ranges. The valleys are characterized by annual grasses; at middle elevations, brushy fuels prevail; and second- growth coniferous forest domi- nates above about 2,500 feet (750m). Landownership is divided among rural residents, industrial forestry operators, small nonindus- trial landowners, homeowners inthe wildland–urban interface, and the Bureau of Land Management, which contracts with the State of Oregon for fire protection. * The article is reprinted from Fire Management Notes 59(4) [Fall 1999]: 27–29. When this article was originally published, Dan Thorpe was the unit forester for the Southwest Oregon District, Oregon Department of Forestry, Central Point, OR. T HOSE R EALLY BAD FIRE DAYS : WHAT M AKES THEM SOD ANGEROUS ?* Dan Thorpe Figure 1—The 1981 Tin Pan Peak Fire isan example ofa plume-dominated fire burning in brushy fuels inthe mid-elevation zone. Such fires are responsible for90 percent ofthe total acres burned inthe Southwestern Oregon District. Photo: Southwest Oregon District, Oregon Department of Forestry, Medford, OR, 1981. Why were we catching some mid-elevation fires but losing others under what seemed tobe identi- cal circumstances? National forests border the district inthe west and east. The district handles more than 1,000 alarms annually, of which about 250 are statistical (bonafide) wildland fires and the rest smoke chases, mutual- aid calls, andno-action responses. About 25 percent ofthe fires are caused by lightning and the rest by humans. Fire seasons typically run from late May through mid- October and average about 150 days. Onthe Southwest Oregon District, we began by mapping past fires that had escaped initial attack. Then we asked our supervisors and firefighters howwe could have stopped each fire. All agreed that some fires had been impossible to control during initial attack, no matter how many resources we threw at them; buton others, the right resource atthe right time would have made the difference between quickly controlling the fire and watching it grow into a project fire. We compared the answers wegot tothe results ofour computer-modeled initial- attack analysis through the National Fire Management Analysis System. Interestingly, the answers and results corroborated each
other—anecdotal evidence from our managers agreed with our computer models. Next, we tried to isolate the com- mon threads among the escaped fires. Ona planimetric map, we looked fora common geographical feature that contributed tothe escapes. Dida wind corridor, a lightning alley, a roadless area, or steep slopes contribute to prevent- ing control? When we overlaid the large fires with some crude fuel typing, we found that the major fires—the ones responsible for90 percent ofour total acres burned—all started inthe mid-elevation zone (fig. 1). Further analysis revealed that we were very successful in controlling the grass fires inthe valley zone. In fact, 96 percent ofthe valley fires were controlled at10 acres (4ha) or less. The same was true for the fires inthe upper elevation conifer- ous forest. Although the coniferous zone had more lightning ignitions than the valleys, we succeeded in holding 94 percent ofthe upper elevation fires to10 acres (4ha) or less. Sowhy were we less success- fulin the mid-elevation zone? We began to describe what was dif- ferent about the mid-elevation zone sowe could later evaluate potential changes using the computer mod- els. We discovered four major dif- ferences: 1. The fuel type was brush rather than timber or grass; 2. Slopes were steeper inthe mid- elevation zone—frequently too steep for engines and dozers tobe fully effective; 3. Because the mid-elevation zone wasin the thermal belt, average temperatures were higher and the relative humidity was lower; and4. The road system was much less developed inthe mid-elevation zone, dueto steeper slopes and fewer timber resources. These four factors contributed to greater contiguous fuel beds, longer response times, higher fire intensities, and greater resistance to control. None of this was news toour fire managers. During their careers, they had controlled hun- dreds of fires inthe mid-elevation zone. The real question was this: Why were we catching some mid- elevation fires but losing others under what seemed tobe similar circumstances? The Atmospheric Factor The answer came from the atmos- phere byway ofthe Haines Index. Historically, our large fires fre- quently occurred during a signifi- cant weather event that can now be measured in terms of factors other than just wind or lightning. The Haines Index allows usto deter- mine what the atmosphere is doing in terms of temperature and lapse rate (the rate at which temperature changes with changing height inthe Earth’s atmosphere). Changes inthe atmosphere have regional effects, andwe found it interesting to note that our national forest neighbors frequently had trouble with large, plume-dominated fires onthe same days that wedid. Asa result, resources for extended attack frequently became limited dueto their use elsewhere inour region. In particular, fire retardant aircraft have often been busy on fires elsewhere right when we needed them. By integrating the daily Haines Index with information onthe daily and seasonal condition ofour fuels, we were able to identify days when high fire intensities were more likely. We completed analysis to determine normal curing dates for annual grasses and the bottoms ofthe live fuel moisture curves. We then compared these data with data onthe thousand-hour fuels to obtain indices of extreme fire dan- ger. By examining past Haines Indices, we determined that the district would have about 10 days per year when the Haines Index was high enough during periods of extreme fire danger to significantly change fire behavior, making a fire much more difficult to control. We dubbed the10 bad fire days “Ira days” after Ira Rambo, the principal author ofour project. Later, wefor- malized the term by making it into the acronym “IRA” (Increased Resource Availability). Sonow we knew what type of days were really our worst. The National Weather Service agreed to give usa daily prediction ofthe next day’s Haines Index, providing us with at least 12 hours’ advance notice whenever oneof those really bad fire days might be coming. Nowit was time toput the information to practical use. But how? Our Response We took the same approach wedo in dealing with the threat of light- ning: we increased our available resources. We asked our fire man- agers, “What doyou need inthe mid-elevation zone to control a fire By integrating the Haines Index with information onthe fuel condition, we identified 10 days when high fire intensities were likely.
sooner on days when plume-domi- nated fires are likely?” Again, the answers were corroborated byour computer models. On those bad fire days—the IRA days—we found that we needed: • Additional aircraft, and sooner; • Larger engine crews (three peo- ple per type 6 engine rather than two); • Air attack to improve crew safety and aircraft efficiency; and • Additional dozers (more than just two), and sooner, for initial attack. But additional resources would come ata cost—upto $5,000 per dayon 10 days per year. Wasit worth it? The answer wasa resounding yes. A break-even examination found that ifwe stopped just one fire in100 years from becoming a project fire, we would still save the taxpayers money! Put another way, ifwe spent an additional $50,000 per year, wehad 100 years tobe suc- cessful and still make itpay. Our board of directors enthusiastically embraced the idea of spending money onIRA days to save money inthe long run. We also made afew other changes that cost little or nothing. OnIRA days, wenow: • Keep resources patrolling inthe mid-elevation zones to minimize response times on potential prob- lem fires (andto help keep fires from starting); • Automatically order retardant; • Immediately launch our type 2 contract helicopter for initial attack; • Preassign structural task forces and liaisons; and • Immediately notify cooperators of fire starts. We discussed our findings with our cooperators, who embraced our proposed response and changed their methods accordingly. Rural fire districts agreed to increase staffing onIRA days to cover the valley zone while our crews patrol the mid-elevation zone. Landown- ers and our Federal cooperator agreed to provide staffing for addi- tional engines onIRA days andto have dozers prepared to respond immediately from logging sites. The USDA Forest Service, which manages the fire retardant program in Oregon, agreed to keep anair- tanker locally available onIRA days. Wildland agencies have known about and successfully used the Haines Index for years. The concept ofIRA days now allows usto inte- grate the Haines Index into our daily preparedness. Acknowledgments The author wishes to thank Forest Officer Ira Rambo for leading the project team that developed the concept ofIRA days; Protection Planner Jim Wolf for participating onthe project team; Southwest Oregon District protection and management staff for contributing tothe project team’s work; and National Weather Service staff for collaborating with the project. ■ Our board of directors enthusiastically embraced the idea of spending money on those bad fire days to save money inthe long run through preparedness.
ACE HAT OULDN TEON * Richard C. Rothermel and Hutch Brown Editor’s note: This article summa- rizes an incident analysis by Richard C. Rothermel under the title, Mann Gulch Fire: A Race That Couldn’tBe Won (Gen. Tech. Rep. INT–299; USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station; 1993). To obtain the full analysis, contact Publications—Ogden Service Center, Rocky Mountain Research Station, USDA Forest Service, 324 25th Street, Ogden, UT 84401, 801-625-5437 (tel.), 801-625-5129 (fax), pubs/rmrs_ogden@fs.fed.us (e-mail). Itwas 4p.m. on August 5, 1949. A USDA Forest Service crew of15 smokejumpers had just completed a jump onto a small fire in Mann Gulch, part ofa roadless area in western Montana that isnow the Gates ofthe Mountains Wilderness. The fire was burning onthe canyon crest across Mann Gulch, nearly a mile (1.6km) away. Although the firefighters were downwind from the fire, it didn’t look ominous; the day was ending, andat least one smokejumper thought that cooling temperatures were laying the fire down for the night. By5 p.m., the crew had gathered its gear. Joined bya Forest Service fire guard who had been single- handedly fighting the fire, the smokejumpers moved down the gulch. The crew planned to reach the mouth of Mann Gulch onthe Missouri River, about 2 miles (3.2km) away, then move around the canyon crest tothe upwind side ofthe fire for initial attack. By6 p.m., barely an hour later, 13of the16 firefighters lay dead or dying. What went wrong? Prevailing Conditions Weather. The day was hot; temper- atures in Mann Gulch possibly exceeded 97 °F (36 °C). Around 3:30p.m., the wind increased and shifted direction; by5:30p.m., itwas blowing up Mann Gulch toward the crew at speeds ofup to40 miles per hour (64km/h). Perhaps dueto firewhirls or down- drafts from local cumulus cells, firebrands were carried from the canyon crest into the mouth of Mann Gulch. By5:45p.m., the fire- fighters found that spot fires 150to 200 yards (140–180m) ahead of them were blocking further progress down the gulch. Terrain. With the way tothe Missouri River cut off, the firefight- ers turned around and headed back upthe gulch. They were ina rock- strewn canyon with treacherous footing. Toone side, across the gulch, was the canyon crest with the main fire. Tothe other side, the slope steepened to76 percent and was topped bya perpendicular rim- rock 6to 12 feet (1.8–3.6m) high. Although broken in places bynar- row crevices, the rimrock posed a View ofthe Mann Gulch drainage from near its head. In 1949, a wildfire blowup cost the lives of13 firefighters not far from this spot. Twenty years later, when this photo was taken, signs of severe fire damage were still evident. Photo: Courtesy of National Agricultural Library, Special Collections, Forest Service Photograph Collection, Beltsville, MD (Philip G. Schlamp, 1969; 519698). When this article was originally published, Dick Rothermel wasa retired research physical scientist for the USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Fire Sciences Laboratory, Missoula, MT; and Hutch Brown was the editor of Fire Management Today. * The article is reprinted from Fire Management Today 60(2) [Spring 2000]: 8–9.
formidable obstacle to anyone try- ingto cross to safety onthe far side ofthe ridge. Fuels. Vegetation in Mann Gulch ranged from mature ponderosa pine with a thick Douglas-fir understory atthe canyon mouth to grasses and shrubs farther upthe canyon. Fuels were tinder dry and highly flammable; dry fuel mois- ture values reached aslow as3 to3.5 percent. Fire Behavior Under the prevailing conditions, the fire’s behavior in Mann Gulch canbe calculated with reasonable certainty. The spot fires first encountered bythe firefighters were spreading atthe slow rate of about 20 feet per minute (6m/min). However, thick surface fuels atthe mouth ofthe gulch soon sent intense flames into the canopy. Within minutes, the wind- driven crown fire was spreading atthe much faster rate of80 to120 feet per minute (24–36m/min). Asthe fire chased the firefighters upthe gulch, it reached grassier fuels where the trees thinned out, increasing its rate of spread to170 to280 feet per minute (52–85m/min). Even farther upthe gulch, where the thinning timber finally gave wayto grassland, midflame windspeeds might have reached 20 miles per hour (32km/h), pushing the fire’s rate of spread as high as750 feet per minute (230m/min)— much faster than the firefighters could run uphill over broken ter- rain. Inthe flashy fuels, flame lengths might have reached 40 feet (12m), with flame temperatures ranging from 1,500to 1,800 °F (815–980 °C). The high flame tem- peratures proved lethal, primarily dueto respiratory damage. Human Factors Lost Communications. Although the jump had gone smoothly, heavy turbulence had forced the pilot to climb before dropping the cargo. The crew’s gear was scattered and its only radio was broken, causing the crew to lose touch with the outside world. Tactics and Training. Instead of heading straight uphill for the rim- rock while the fire was still moving slowly, the firefighters retreated upthe gulch while angling uphill toward the rim. At first, their retreat showed little urgency—one firefighter even stopped to take photos. However, after 450 yards (410m), with the fire gaining ground and now only a minute behind, the foreman ordered the crew to drop all heavy gear. At this point, the crew probably broke upas the firefighters began running as fast as they could. But the faster the crew moved upthe gulch, the lighter and flashier the fuels became, the stronger the wind blew at ground level, and the faster the fire spread. Realizing that the crew wasin a race it couldn’twin, the foreman stopped to ignite an escape fire inthe grass, with the main fire only 30 seconds behind. Although the escape fire saved the foreman’s life, the other firefighters failed to understand his purpose and ignored or couldn’t hear his entreaties tolie down with him inside the black. Eleven ofthe remaining crew continued racing ahead ofthe main fire ata slight uphill angle; all were caught bythe fire within 3to 4 minutes after the foreman lit his escape fire. Ten died almost immediately and the 11th onthe following day. Inthe leeof a convection current caused bythe main fire, the escape fire was unaffected by wind and therefore spread atan almost 90- degree angle tothe path ofthe main fire, directly toward the rim- rock. Four firefighters followed its course, perhaps thinking that it would deflect the main fire. Twoof them found a fissure inthe rim- rock and climbed through tothe safety ofa rock slide onthe far slope. The third firefighter turned away from the fissure and perished inthe main fire below the rimrock. The fourth, although caught bythe main fire, made it over the rim only todie the next dayof his burns. Lessons Learned Deeply shocked bythe Mann Gulch tragedy and subsequent firefighter fatalities in California, the Forest Service initiated reforms to prevent future disasters. Thanks to improved training, equipment, and safety techniques, another tragedy was averted on August 29, 1985, during the Butte Fire onthe Salmon National Forest, ID. Seventy-three firefighters were entrapped forup to2 hours bya severe crown fire. By calmly mov- ingto preestablished safety zones and deploying their fire shelters, all73 firefighters escaped serious injury. In part, they owe their lives tothe lessons learned from the Mann Gulch Fire. ■
On July 6, 1994, 14 firefighters died ina wildfire on Storm King Mountain in western Colorado. Their deaths made the South Canyon Fire a landmark event inthe annals of wildland fire- fighting, next to such major fire- fighting tragedies asthe Big Blowup of 1910 and the Mann Gulch Fire of 1949.** Within weeks after the fire, the Report ofthe South Canyon Fire Accident Investigation Team (USDA/USDI/USDC 1994) outlined many ofthe circumstances that ledto disaster. Later, John Maclean (1999) described additional factors, such as resource use decisions inthe days before the blowup. This article summarizes a detailed study bythe authors onthe fire behavior associated with the South Canyon Fire (Butler and others HE OUTH ANYON IRE EVISITED L ESSONS INF IREB EHAVIOR * Bret W. Butler, Roberta A. Bartlette, Larry S. Bradshaw, Jack D. Cohen, Patricia L. Andrews, Ted Putnam, Richard J. Mangan, and Hutch Brown When this article was originally published, Bret Butler wasa research mechanical engineer, Roberta Bartlette wasa forester, Larry Bradshaw wasa meteorologist, and Jack Cohen and Pat Andrews were research physical scientists for the USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory, Missoula, MT; Ted Putnam wasan equip- ment specialist (retired) and Dick Mangan was the Fire and Aviation Program Leader for the Forest Service’s Technology and Development Center, Missoula, MT; and Hutch Brown was the editor of Fire Management Today. 1998). What fire-related factors contributed tothe tragedy? And what lessons do they teach? Topography The Colorado River cuts through a series of north–south ridges onits way west through the Rocky Mountains. At Glenwood Springs, the river bisects a ridge of shale and sandstone, forming a narrow canyon atthe base of Storm King Mountain, at8,700 feet (2,700m) the highest peak inthe area. The mountain rises about 3,000 feet (900m) above the river’s north bank. Broken spurs and steep ravines reach south from the peak tothe river. Main Ridge (fig. 1), the site ofthe South Canyon Fire, starts ina sad- dle south ofthe peak and runs southwest for about 3,700 feet Winds whipping from the west through the Colorado River Gorge were funneled upthe ravine where the fire was worst, playing akey role inthe blowup. ** Onthe Big Blowup, see Stephen J. Pyne, “A Story To Tell,”Fire Management Today60(4): 6–8; onthe Mann Gulch Fire, see Mike Dombeck, “The Mann Gulch Fire: They Did Not Diein Vain,” and Richard C. Rothermel and Hutch Brown, “A Race That Couldn’tBe Won,” Fire Management Today60(2): 4–9. Figure 1—View ofthe South Canyon Fire site looking northeast across the West Drainage atthe west flank of Main Ridge. Note the west flank fireline, helispots (H–1and H–2), Lunch Spot Ridge, and West Bench. Illustration: USDA Forest Service, Fire Sciences Laboratory, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Missoula, MT, 1998. * The article is reprinted from Fire Management Today 61(1) [Winter 2001]: 14–26.
(1,100m) before ending ata knob overlooking the Colorado River. From the knob, the canyon walls fall steeply about 1,100 feet (330m) tothe river below. Though adjacent toan interstate highway, Main Ridge is difficult to approach. No roads or trails lead up from the highway. The ridge is flanked onthe east and west by deep, twisting ravines running north and south, called the East Most ofthe fireline onthe fire’s west flank cut through Gambel oak, where visibility was limit- edand the fuels were unusually flammable under the drought conditions. A Firefighting Tragedy Inthe summer of 1994, Colorado suffered its worst drought in decades. Severe fire weather was certain to come. On July 2, a major storm hit the State with dry lightning strikes, igniting thousands of wildland fires. One fire started onthe flanks of Storm King Mountain near Glenwood Springs, a resort com- munity in western Colorado. The mountain overlooks an interstate highway ina canyon carved bythe Colorado River. Onthe morn- ingof July 3, drivers onthe high- way could seea puff of smoke ona mountain spur called Main (or Hell’s Gate) Ridge, where a light- ning fire smoldered ina tree. A caller reported the fire from across the river ina gulch known as South Canyon. The caller was unsure exactly where the smoke originated, so Federal officials named the fire after the caller’s location. At first, the South Canyon Fire seemed insignificant compared to much larger fires burning else- where. For days, fire managers and aerial observers monitored the slowly spreading fire from a distance. None thought it wise to divert thinly stretched resources from higher priority fires. On July 5, more than 2 days after the fire’s ignition, a hand crew finally reached Main Ridge. Joined by smokejumpers and hot- shots, the firefighters began a concerted effort to contain the fire, now dozens of acres in size. Bythe afternoon of July 6, they seemed tobe making headway, cutting fireline along two flanks ofthe fire. Suddenly, the fire blew up. Witnesses atthe helibase below Storm King Mountain watched in helpless horror as smoke billowed across the slopes, enveloping the fire shelters they could see deployed. Within minutes, 14of the49 people on Storm King Mountain—more than a quarter ofthe firefighting force—lay dead. Others, some badly burned, escaped over the ridge, while still others survived in their fire shel- ters. It took hours for many ofthe traumatized survivors to descend the mountain to safety. Meanwhile, the fire continued to rage, burning 2,115 acres (856ha) before finally coming under control on July 11. Figure 2—Approximate distribution of vegetation inthe area ofthe South Canyon Fire (notto scale). Gambel oak occupied north- and west-facing slopes, including most ofthe terrain traversed bythe west flank fireline. Open pinyon–juniper forest predominated elsewhere, except foran area of ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir south ofthe Double Draws. Illustration: USDA Forest Service, Fire Sciences Laboratory, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Missoula, MT, 1998.
and West Drainages. The first fire- fighters reached the fire by hiking for hours upthe East Drainage. The fire burned mostly onthe west flank of Main Ridge, sothe firefight- ers built fireline down into the West Drainage (fig. 1). They traversed steep slopes ofup to55 percent, with treacherous footing inthe crumbling shale. Side spurs and draws angling from Main Ridge down into the drainage slowed trav- eland blocked the firefighters’ view ofthe fire. The most prominent side spur, where many firefighters ate lunch on July 6, became known as Lunch Spot Ridge. The bottom of West Drainage is especially steep, with a slope of about 80 percent. The bottom widens into a half-acre (0.2-ha) level area called the Bowl about 250 feet (80m) upcanyon from the base oftwo long, vertical gullies, the Double Draws. Upcanyon from the Bowl, the steep slope flattens into an area called the West Bench. The narrow mouth of West Drainage, facing southwest, opens onto the highway and river. Winds whipping from the west through the river gorge are funneled upthe ravine. They played akey role inthe blowup. Fuels Vegetation inthe area ofthe fire was mixed (fig. 2). Gambel oak thickets covered north- and west- facing slopes. Gambel oak reached from Main Ridge down tothe West Bench just north of Lunch Spot Ridge, the area traversed by most ofthe fireline onthe fire’s west flank. More than 50 years old, the oak formed a closed canopy 6to 12 feet (1.8–2.4m) tall, with leaf litter 3to 6 inches (8–16cm) deep and limit- ed visibility (fig. 3). Elsewhere, except fora pocket of ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir south ofthe Double Draws, open pinyon– juniper forest prevailed, with a grassy herbaceous layer. The vegetation was generally thick- est toward the top of Main Ridge, giving wayto shrubs and thick cured grasses below. The bottom ofthe drainage was generally covered with grass, with occasional pockets of dead brush that had rolled or washed downhill. The Bowl sup- ported heavy live vegetation, including numerous conifers. Dueto the drought, all fuels were several weeks ahead of their sum- mer drying trends. Fine dead fuel moisture content was about 2to 5 percent. Live foliar moisture was probably about 125 percent in green Gambel oak and about 60 percent in underburned oak. Weather Conditions were drier and warmer than average. Precipitation levels at Glenwood Springs from October 1, 1993, to July 6, 1994, were 58per- cent of normal. Temperatures were higher than usual from May through July. On July 5, the air in western Colorado was hot and dry, with light winds from the south. A cold front building over Idaho reached Colorado early on July 6. With the approaching cold front, the relative humidity dropped from a high of40 percent on July 5to 29 percent on July 6, allowing the fire to remain active overnight. The cold front reached Glenwood Springs at about 3:20p.m., bringing strong winds from the west. Wind combined with topography to create turbulence inthe West Drainage (fig. 4). The westerly winds speeded upas they pushed through the narrow Colorado River Gorge. Caught bythe angle of Main Ridge, they swept north upthe West Drainage. Rising daytime temperatures onthe upper moun- tain slopes increased the upcanyon flow by reducing pressure atthe canyon mouth, asdid strong high- er elevation westerly winds pouring across Main Ridge. By about 4p.m., winds of30 to45 miles per hour (50–70km/h) were rushing upslope The relative humidity dropped from July 5to July 6, allowing the fire to continue spreading down- hill overnight toward the bottom ofthe drainage. Figure 3—Firefighters constructing fire- line onthe west flank of Main Ridge onthe South Canyon Fire, July 6, 1994. The heavy Gambel oak severely limited visibili- tyand remained combustible despite par- tial underburning. Photo: USDA Forest Service, Fire Sciences Laboratory, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Missoula, MT.
from the mouth of West Drainage, with gusts reaching 50 miles per hour (80km/h). Cross-cutting higher elevation winds created a shear layer and turbulence inthe canyon. Early Fire Behavior From its point of ignition on Main Ridge (fig. 5), the fire backed slowly downhill, burning in cured grasses under juniper and pinyon pine andin the leaf litter under Gambel oak. Sheltered from the low to moderate winds by canopy cover, the fire torched only where ladder fuels carried it into individual trees. The fire advanced mostly north and west, making occasional upslope runs through canopy fuels. From July 2to July 6, the fire backed downhill ata nearly constant rate. On July 5, firefighters arrived on Main Ridge and constructed the first helispot (H–1) but failed to build effective firelines. The next morning, the firefighters built another helispot (H–2), then cuta fireline along the ridgetop between the helispots. Next, the leaders scouted the fire by helicopter and made the fateful decision to continue fighting the fire from Main Ridge instead of evacuating the ridge and attacking the fire from the highway below. They decided to improve the ridgetop fireline while building fireline down into the West Drainage to hook around the west flank ofthe fire. By3:15p.m., 49 firefighters were onthe mountain, about evenly divided between the ridgetop and west flank firelines. During the night of July 5, low humidity kept the fire advancing ata probable rate of about 32 feet per hour (10m/h) By midmorning on July 6, the fire had burned into the Double Draws and was about three- fourths ofthe way down tothe bot- tomof the drainage. Assuming that the rate of spread remained con- stant during the day, the fire would have reached the bottom ofthe drainage by about 4p.m. The Blowup At about 3:55p.m., the fire, fedby growing winds, made three upslope canopy runs through the patch of pine and Douglas-fir south ofthe Double Draws. Flame lengths exceeded 100 feet (30m). Photos show smoke rising from well below the crown fire runs, indicating that fire was reaching the bottom ofthe drainage. By this time, strong westerly winds were flowing across the tops ofthe ridges while a strong upcanyon (southerly) wind was blowing upthe bottom ofthe West Drainage; this combination created severe turbulence over the West Drainage. For days, the fire did not seem ominous. It backed slowly downhill in surface fuels, making occasional upslope fingered runs through unburned canopy fuels. Figure 4—Interaction ofthe westerly wind flow over the ridgetops burned bythe South Canyon Fire and the northerly wind flow upthe West Drainage, forming a shear layer (dashed line). The shear layer generated turbulence that helped spread fire and burning embers upthe West Drainage and onto the ridgetops. Illustration: USDA Forest Service, Fire Sciences Laboratory, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Missoula, MT, 1998.
Embers from the crown fire runs and from the flames inthe bottom ofthe drainage scattered inthe tur- bulence, igniting spot fires upand across the canyon. By4:02p.m., firefighters reported spot fires actively burning onthe opposite (east-facing) slope ofthe West Drainage. Pushed by winds, the fire swept upthe east-facing slope and upcanyon toward the Bowl ina running flame front 50 yards (45m) wide. Inthe Bowl, relatively dense surface fuels pushed the fire into the crowns ofthe conifers there, increasing the size and height ofthe convection current over the fire and lofting embers high up both sides ofthe drainage. Onthe ridgetop, spot fires were multiplying across the fireline by4:03p.m. By4:04p.m., recognizing the dan- ger, the firefighters onthe west flank were allin retreat. Those observing the fire south of Lunch Spot Ridge returned to their lunch spot, while those north of Lunch Spot Ridge began moving upthe west flank fireline toward Main Ridge. At about the same time, the firefighters onthe ridgetop aban- doned efforts to control the spot fires spreading around them and headed toward H–1for helicopter evacuation. By4:07p.m., the fire front was rushing upcanyon ina “U” shape past the Bowl (fig. 6). Two minutes later, it jumped onto the West Bench (fig. 1), entering the Gambel oak directly under the west flank fireline. The high winds, minimally impeded bythe relatively thin canopy cover onthe bench, whipped upthe flames inthe sur- face fuels and sent them into the canopy. The intense heat from the burning oak canopy, coupled with Figure 5—South Canyon Fire perimeters from the time of ignition on July 2 through the morning of July 6, before the blowup (3 acres = 1.2ha; 11 acres = 4.5ha; 29 acres = 12ha; 50 acres = 20ha; and 120 acres = 50ha). Illustration: USDA Forest Service, Fire Sciences Laboratory, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Missoula, MT, 1998. Figure 6—South Canyon Fire perimeter at4:07p.m., minutes after the blowup began. The fire had jumped across the West Drainage and was advancing upcanyon ina “U” shape below the west flank fireline. Illustration: USDA Forest Service, Fire Sciences Laboratory, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Missoula, MT, 1998. Onthe morning of July 6, the leaders made the fateful decision to continue fighting the fire from above.
relatively low live fuel moisture lev- els, ledto continuous combustion of every fuel type asthe fire raced upslope inthe Gambel oak north of Lunch Spot Ridge. Above the West Bench, the fire was more exposed tothe westerly winds sweeping over Main Ridge. The flames spread upcanyon at about 3 feet per second (0.9m/s) while making upslope runs before the winds at6 to9 feet per second (1.8–2.7m/s). One run carried all the way over Main Ridge, forcing the firefighters who were moving toward H–1to turn around and head instead forH–2. At4:10p.m., a spot fire ignited onthe West Bench ahead ofthe main fire front and began sweeping ups- lope below the fleeing west flank firefighters. Within minutes, ithad merged with the main fire and overrun the entire west flank fire- line. By4:14p.m., the fire was cresting on Main Ridge and threat- ening H–2 (fig. 7). All but twoof the firefighters who were onor had reached Main Ridge dropped into the East Drainage and fled down- canyon to safety. The Entrapments Before the blowup, an advance scout anda group of eight firefight- ers were observing the fire south of Lunch Spot Ridge. By4:06p.m., all nine had retreated to Lunch Spot Ridge. The scout found a safety zone onthe ridge, which remained largely unburned during the blowup. The other eight moved upridge toan area of black several hundred feet below H–1. At4:24p.m., they deployed their fire shel- ters. Over the next 45 minutes, they felt the heat from three sepa- rate fire runs just south of Lunch Spot Ridge, about 500 feet (150m) away. All survived unhurt. The rest ofthe west flank firefight- ers were north of Lunch Spot Ridge before the blowup, widely dispersed along the fireline. All retreated back upthe fireline toward Main Ridge—a distance ofup to1,880 feet (575m) for some. Twelve fire- fighters who had been working onthe lower portion ofthe fireline were caught bythe fire at about 4:13p.m. Most were ina group about 280 feet (85m) below Main Ridge. All died within seconds of each other (see the sidebar). At4:14p.m., two helitack person- nel watched the fire front approach them atH–2. Instead of dropping into the East Drainage with the other ridgeline firefighters, they ranup the ridge toward the moun- tain, perhaps trying to reach higher ground for helicopter evacuation. By4:18p.m., a finger ofthe fire cut off any possibility of escape into the East Drainage. Angling toward a rock outcropping, the two died crossing a gully at about 4:23p.m., probably from inhaling lethal hot gases funneled upthe draw. Lessons Learned The South Canyon Fire tragically illustrates the deadly fire behavior that can occur under certain condi- tions of fuel, weather, and topogra- phy. Though extreme, such fire behavior is normal under the con- ditions that prevailed on Storm King Mountain onthe afternoon of July 6. Until then, the fire wasa low-intensity surface burn, with high-intensity fire behavior limited tothe torching of individual trees and narrow runs within the fire’s perimeter. Butby 4p.m., changing Cross-cutting winds created a shear layer and tur- bulence inthe canyon, scattering embers and igniting spot fires upand across the canyon. Figure 7—South Canyon Fire perimeter at4:14p.m., just after the entrapment onthe west flank fireline. The fire had completely overrun the west flank fireline and was threat- ening H–2. Illustration: USDA Forest Service, Fire Sciences Laboratory, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Missoula, MT, 1998.
wind conditions, combined with slope and fire location, dramatically altered the fire’s behavior. Within minutes, flames swept through the live fuel canopy ina continuous blazing front that caught the fire- fighters before they could reach their safety zone, resulting in14 fatalities. Several conclusions canbe drawn from what happened on Storm King Mountain: • Topography can strongly affect local wind patterns. In moun- tainous terrain, surface winds canbe highly variable and subject to sudden dramatic change, espe- cially during frontal passages. Winds should be constantly mon- itored all around the fire perime- ter. • Vegetation, topography, and smoke can prevent firefighters from noticing changes in fire behavior. Evidence suggests that the12 firefighters overrun onthe west flank fireline were caught by surprise, perhaps because they failed to realize how close the fire was getting. Lookouts positioned outside the burn area or overhead can communicate urgency and give escape directions. • Extreme fire behavior often occurs abruptly. The low-intensi- ty backing fire gave no hint of what wasto come; the transition toa high-intensity fire was sud- den and perhaps unexpected inthe live fuels. Under certain con- ditions, green vegetation can sup- port and even promote high- intensity burning. A fire’s posi- tion should be constantly moni- tored in relation to wind, slope, and fuels; training in fire envi- ronment assessment might help firefighters anticipate potential fire behavior. • The longer and farther a fire burns, the more likely itis to change behavior. Given sufficient time, alow-intensity fire can often reach a position where fuel, weather, and terrain combine to produce high-intensity fire behavior. The location ofthe fire perimeter should be constantly monitored. Within minutes after the firefighters began to retreat, the fire had entirely overrun the west flank fireline, claiming the first fatalities. How Were the West Flank Firefighters Overrun? Before reaching Main Ridge, the last survivor onthe west flank fireline was knocked from his feet bya blast ofhot air from the rear. Most ofthe twelve who died were still in line, many with their packs on. They had neither discarded their tools nor made any organized attempt to deploy their fire shelters. The dense Gambel oak and smoke inthe air likely pre- vented them from seeing how close the fire really was. Circumstances suggest that the fire overran them with unusual rapidity, perhaps catching them by surprise; the vegetation all around them might have seemed suddenly to explode in flames. Three scenarios, per- haps in combination, might explain such fire behavior: •Collapsing Pocket inthe Fire Front. Toward the top of Main Ridge, northeast ofthe west flank fireline, the vegetation changed from Gambel oakto a pinyon–juniper mix (fig. 2). The fire could advance faster inthe flashier pinyon–juniper fuels tothe left ofthe firefighters than inthe Gambel oak behind them. To their right, the fire had already reached Main Ridge. The fire- fighters were ina pocket, with fire burning around them on three sides. The intense energy projected from three sides might have rapidly ignited the vegeta- tion around the firefighters, col- lapsing the pocket and sending a blast ofhot air upslope. •Descending Smoke Column. Asthe fire gained onthe fleeing firefighters, a gust from the strong westerly winds sweeping over the West Drainage might have pushed the column of smoke and burning gases directly onto the firefighters. The embers and hot air would have quickly ignited the surrounding vegeta- tion, and the gust ofhot gases might have been experienced upslope asa blast from the rear. •Rapidly Spreading Fire. The fire spread upslope much faster than the firefighters were traveling. By4:13p.m., asthe firefighters stumbled over oak stobs upthe last and steepest section of fire- line below Main Ridge, their rate of travel would have fallen to1 to3 feet per second (0.3–0.9m/s). They simply couldn’t outrun the fire, which by this time was trav- eling upto 9 feet per second (2.7m/s). The rapid rate of spread might have pushed a blast ofhot air upslope.
• The safety ofan escape route isa function ofits length and direc- tion. Escape routes should be chosen based onthe potential for extreme fire behavior. Ideally, they are short and downhill. • Underburned Gambel oak pro- vides no safety zone. The blowup began in green Gambel oak but continued into the underburned areas above the west flank fire- line, which offered no safety. Firefighters donot have “one foot inthe black” when working adja- cent to underburned shrub vege- tation. None ofthe lessons from the South Canyon Fire is particularly new, and most will be readily apparent to firefighters. Perhaps the most important lesson is that the blowup was normal under the circum- stances. A similar alignment of environmental factors and extreme fire behavior isnot uncommon and will happen again. What was not normal is that 14 firefighters were caught inthe blowup and could not escape. By learning from their experience, firefighters can help prevent a similar tragedy from occurring elsewhere. Literature Cited Butler, B.W.; Bartlette, R.A.; Bradshaw, L.S.; Cohen, J.D.; Andrews, P.L.; Putnam, T.; Mangan, R.J. 1998. Fire behavior associ- ated with the 1994 South Canyon Fire on Storm King Mountain, Colorado. Res. Pap. RMRS–RP–9. Ogden, UT: USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. Maclean, J.N. 1999. Fire onthe mountain: The true story ofthe South Canyon Fire. New York, NY: William Morrow andCo. USDA/USDI/USDC (U.S. Department of Agriculture/U.S. Department ofthe Interior/U.S. Department of Commerce). 1994. Report ofthe South Canyon Fire Accident Investigation Team. Washington, DC: USDA/USDI/USDC. ■ Websites on Fire* Lessons Learned Center “Train asyou work and work asyou train”—that’sthe motto ofthe Wildland Fire Lessons Learned Center. Established in March 2002, the Center aims to improve safe work performance and organiza- tional learning for Federal and State wildland fire- fighting agencies. After-incident reports and infor- mation teams provide valuable research and analy- sis, a growing online library supports knowledge management, and two online publications encour- age information transfer. Lessons Learned isan interagency program spon- sored bythe USDA Forest Service and USDI Bureau of Indian Affairs, Bureau of Land Management, National Park Service, andU.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. The Center works in cooperation with the Federal Fire Aviation Safety Team, National Wildfire Coordinating Group, and National Association of State Foresters. Found at <http://www.wildfirelessons.net> On Lunch Spot Ridge, a group deployed fire shelters and survived three separate fire runs in about 45 minutes. * Occasionally, Fire Management Todaybriefly describes Websites brought toour attention bythe wildland fire community. Readers should not construe the description of these sites asin any way exhaustive oras an official endorsement bythe USDA Forest Service. To have a Website described, contact the managing editor, Hutch Brown, at USDA Forest Service, Office of Communication, Mail Stop 1111, 1400 Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-1111, 202-205-1028 (tel.), 202-205-0885 (fax), hutchbrown@fs.fed.us (e-mail).
Surpassing our expectations and any previous year’s entries, Fire Management Today received more than 400 images from about 50 people for our 2003 photo con- test. Thanks to everyone who con- tributed their best fire-related images to this year’s competition. We asked people to submit images insix categories: • Wildland fire, • Prescribed fire, • Wildland/urban interface fire, • Aerial resources, • Ground resources, and • Miscellaneous (fire effects, fire weather, fire-dependent commu- nities or species, etc.). After the contest deadline (the first Friday in March), we evaluated the submissions and eliminated all technically flawed images, such as those with soft focus orlow resolu- tion. Many of these images were otherwise outstanding. Next, our judges reviewed, scored, and ranked the remaining images based on traditional photography criteria. They asked questions such as: • Isthe composition skillful and dynamic? • Are the colors and patterns effec- tive? • Does the image tell a story or convey a mood? Ifthe judges thought that only oneor two images ina category deserved an award, then they made only oneor two awards in that cat- egory—First, Second, or Third Place, based onthe merit ofthe image. Finally, the winning images were reviewed bya fire safety expert to ensure that they did not show unsafe firefighting practices (unless that was their purpose). Ifan unsafe practice was evident, the image was disqualified from com- petition, and the award went tothe next highest ranked image. Doyou have an image that tells a story about wildland firefighting? Would you like tosee your photo in print? Turn tothe back inside cover for information about our 2004 photo contest. ■ IRE ANAGEMENT ODAY NNOUNCES W INNERS OF 2003 P HOTO C ONTEST Madelyn Dillon Madelyn Dillon isthe editor of Fire Management Today, Fort Collins, CO. Thanks to Fire Photo Experts We assembled an excellent panel of judges, people with years of photography experience: • Joe Champ isa professor of journalism and technical com- munication at Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO. Joeis President of Champ Communication Research. Before his academic career, Joe worked for10 years asan award-winning news anchor, reporter, and photographer. • Lane Eskew isan editor with the USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, CO. As part ofhis job, Lane evaluates photos for publication. His own photos have been published in outdoor magazines, books, brochures, and other media. • Barbara Menzel isa computer programmer for the Forest Service, Forest Management Service Center, Fort Collins, CO. Barb has been an amateur photographer for nearly 15 years. A collection ofher pho- tos was recently showcased ata local photography lab. We also made sure that a profes- sional safety expert evaluated all winning photos: • Ed Hollenshead isthe Forest Service’s national fire opera- tions safety officer atthe National Interagency Fire Center, Boise, ID. Throughout his30-year career, Edhas been actively involved in wildland fire, serving in nearly every capacity, from “ground- pounder” to incident com- mander. We sincerely appreciate the time and skill that our panel members gave to this effort!
Second Place, Wildland Fire. Flames leap into action onthe Monument Fire, Malheur National Forest, OR. Photo: Ben Croft, USDA Forest Service, Missoula Technology and Development Center, Missoula, MT, 2002. First Place, Prescribed Fire. A backfire consumes dry vegetation during a prescribed burn onthe Stillwater National Wildlife Refuge, NV. Photo: John Wood, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Klamath Basin National Wildlife Refuge Complex, Tulelake, CA, 2002. First Place, Wildland Fire. Trees silhouetted against the advancing flames onthe Hayman Fire between Denver and Colorado Springs, CO. Photo: Steven Smith, Colorado Springs Fire Department, Colorado Springs, CO, 2002. Second Place, Prescribed Fire. A member ofthe Bandelier Fire Crew gathers limbs to toss on burning piles, part ofa thinning project to create a fuel break inthe Jemez Mountains, NM. Photo: Kristen Honig, National Park Service, Los Alamos, NM, 2003. Second Place, Wildland/Urban Interface. Standing inthe path ofthe Rodeo–Chediski Fire onthe Apache–Sitgreaves National Forest, AZ, this mobile home park inthe community of Heber-Overguard was almost totally consumed bythe intense firestorm. Photo: Thomas Iraci, USDA Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Region, Portland, OR, 2002.
Third Place, Wildland/Urban Interface. Grazing llamas watch calmly asa wildfire draws dangerously close to homes onthe Deer Creek Ranch near Selma, OR. Photo: Thomas Iraci, USDA Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Region, Portland, OR, 2002. First Place, Aerial Resources. Airtanker 22 drops a load of retardant onthe Missionary Ridge Fire, San Juan–Rio Grande National Forest, CO, 2002. Photo: Ben Croft, USDA Forest Service, Missoula Technology and Development Center, Missoula, MT, 2002. Second Place, Aerial Resources. A member ofthe Mesa Verde National Park helitack crew guides helicopter 910in fora safe landing atan unimproved helispot during the East Canyon #2 Fire in southwestern Colorado. Photo: Bill Pool, National Park Service, Phoenix, AZ, 2002. Third Place, Wildland Fire. The Eightmile Lookout is peacefully out- lined against distant smoke from the Missionary Ridge Fire, San Juan–Rio Grande National Forest, CO. Photo: Mark Roper, USDA Forest Service, San Juan–Rio Grande National Forest, Pagosa Ranger District, Pagosa Springs, CO, 2002. Third Place, Prescribed Fire. Smoke from all directions is drawn into the heart ofa 3,200-acre (1,300-ha) prescribed burn onthe Lower Klamath National Wildlife Refuge, CA. Photo: Troy Portnoff, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Klamath Basin National Wildlife Refuge Complex, Tulelake, CA, 2002.
20 03 Second Place, Ground Resources. A crew of firefighters snakes upthe line to work ona large burnout operation onthe Toolbox Fire, Fremont National Forest, OR. Photo: Thomas Iraci, USDA Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Region, Portland, OR, 2002. First Place, Miscellaneous. Smoke from the Eyerly Fire onthe Deschutes National Forest, OR, creates a stunning sunrise. Photo: Eli Lehmann, USDA Forest Service, Mount Baker–Snoqualmie National Forest, Willard, WA, 2002. Third Place, Ground Resources. A firefighting crew works diligently to build a line along a burn onthe Manti–LaSal National Forest, UT. Photo: Victor Bradfield, USDA Forest Service, Caribou–Targhee National Forest, Pocatello, ID, 1989. Third Place, Aerial Resources. Airtanker 23 drops retardant onthe approaching Rodeo–Chediski Fire, Apache–Sitgreaves National Forest, AZ, asit engulfs Mule Canyon. Photo: Tom Schafer, Show Low, AZ, 2002. 20 03 P hoto Co ntest Winn ers
First Place, Ground Resources. Fire from below casts striking shadows inthe smoke during a night burnout bythe Baker River Hotshots onthe Tiller Complex Fire, Umpqua National Forest, OR. Photo: Eli Lehmann, USDA Forest Service, Mount Baker Snoqualmie National Forest, Willard, WA, 2002. Honorable Mention, Ground Resources. Lassen and Plumas Hotshots prepare toset an offroad backfire onthe Blue Cut Fire, San Bernardino National Forest, CA. Photo: Wade Salverson, Susanville, CA, 2002. Third Place, Miscellaneous. Aftermath ofa structure fire onthe West Plains near Spokane, WA. Firefighters must be ready ata moment’s notice. Photo: Torben Dalstra, Spokane County Forest District #10, Airway Heights, WA, 2002. Second Place, Miscellaneous. The historic Eightmile Lookout onthe San Juan National Forest, CO, was used until the 1970s. Photo: Mark Roper, USDA Forest Service, San Juan–Rio Grande National Forest, Pagosa Ranger District, Pagosa Springs, CO, 2002.
UIDELINES FOR ONTRIBUTORS Paper Copy. Type or word-process the manu- script on white paper (double-spaced) onone side. Include the complete name(s), title(s), affil- iation(s), and address(es) ofthe author(s), as well as telephone and fax numbers ande-mail information. Ifthe same ora similar manuscript is being submitted elsewhere, include that infor- mation also. Authors who are affiliated should submit a camera-ready logo for their agency, institution, or organization. Style. Authors are responsible for using wild- land fire terminology that conforms tothe latest standards setby the National Wildfire Coordinating Group under the National Interagency Incident Management System. FMT uses the spelling, capitalization, hyphenation, and other styles recommended inthe United States Government Printing Office Style Manual, as required bythe U.S. Department of Agriculture. Authors should use the U.S. system of weight and measure, with equivalent values inthe metric system. Tryto keep titles concise and descriptive; subheadings and bulleted material are useful and help readability. Asa general rule of clear writing, use the active voice (e.g., write, “Fire managers know…” and not, “Itis known…”). Provide spellouts for all abbrevia- tions. Consult recent issues (onthe World Wide Webat <http://www.fs.fed.us/fire/planning/firenote.htm >) for placement ofthe author’s name, title, agency affiliation, and location, as well asfor style of paragraph headings and references. Tables. Tables should be logical and under- standable without reading the text. Include tables atthe endof the manuscript. Photos and Illustrations. Figures, illustrations, overhead transparencies (originals are prefer- able), and clear photographs (color slides or glossy color prints are preferable) are often essential tothe understanding of articles. Clearly label all photos and illustrations (figure 1, 2, 3, etc.; photograph A, B, C, etc.). Atthe endof the manuscript, include clear, thorough fig- ure and photo captions labeled inthe same wayas the corresponding material (figure 1, 2, 3; photograph A, B, C; etc.). Captions should make photos and illustrations understandable without reading the text. For photos, indicate the name and affiliation ofthe photographer and the year the photo was taken. Electronic Files. See special mailing instruc- tions above. Please label all disks carefully with name(s) of file(s) and system(s) used. Ifthe manuscript is word-processed, please submit a3-1/2 inch, IBM-compatible disk together with the paper copy (see above) asan electronic file inone of these formats: WordPerfect 5.1for DOS; WordPerfect 7.0or earlier for Windows 95; Microsoft Word 6.0or earlier for Windows 95; Rich Text format; or ASCII. Digital photos maybe submitted but must beat least 300 dpi and accompanied bya high-resolution (preferably laser) printout for editorial review and quality control during the printing process. Donot embed illustrations (such as maps, charts, and graphs) inthe electronic file for the manuscript. Instead, submit each illustration at1,200 dpi ina separate file using a standard interchange for- mat such asEPS, TIFF, or JPEG, accompanied bya high-resolution (preferably laser) printout. For charts and graphs, include the data needed to reconstruct them. Release Authorization. Non-Federal Government authors must sign a release to allow their work tobe inthe public domain andon the World Wide Web. In addition, all photos and illustrations require a written release bythe photographer or illustrator. The author, photo, and illustration release forms are available from General Manager April Baily. Contributors Wanted Weneed your fire-related articles and photographs for Fire Management Today! Feature articles should beup to about 2,000 words in length. We also need short items ofup to200 words. Subjects of articles published in Fire Management Todayinclude: Aviation Firefighting experiences Communication Incident management Cooperation Information management (including systems) Ecosystem management Personnel Equipment/Technology Planning (including budgeting) Fire behavior Preparedness Fire ecology Prevention/Education Fire effects Safety Fire history Suppression Fire science Training Fire use (including prescribed fire) Weather Fuels management Wildland–urban interface Tohelp prepare your submission, see “Guidelines for Contributors” in this issue. Editorial Policy Fire Management Today (FMT) isan interna- tional quarterly magazine for the wildland fire community. FMTwelcomes unsolicited manu- scripts from readers onany subject related to fire management. Because space isa considera- tion, long manuscripts might be abridged bythe editor, subject to approval bythe author; FMT does print short pieces of interest to readers. Submission Guidelines Submitmanuscripts to either the general man- ager orthe managing editor at: USDA Forest Service Attn: April J. Baily, F&AM Staff Mail Stop 1107 1400 Independence Avenue, SW Washington, DC 20250-1107 tel. 202-205-0891, fax 202-205-1272 e-mail: abaily@fs.fed.us USDA Forest Service Attn: Hutch Brown, Office of Communication Mail Stop 1111 1400 Independence Avenue, SW Washington, DC 20250-1111 tel. 202-205-1028, fax 202-205-0885 e-mail: hutchbrown@fs.fed.us Mailing Disks. Donot mail disks with electronic files tothe above addresses, because mail will be irradiated and the disks could be rendered inop- erable. Send electronic files bye-mail orby courier service to: USDA Forest Service Attn: Hutch Brown, 2CEN Yates 201 14th Street, SW Washington, DC 20024 Ifyou have questions about a submission, please contact the managing editor, Hutch Brown.
HOTO ONTEST NNOUNCEMENT Fire Management Today invites youto submit your best fire-related images tobe judged inour annual competition. Judging begins after the first Friday in March of each year. Awards All contestants will receive aCD with the images and captions (as submitted) remaining after techni- cal review. TheCD will identify the winners by category. Winning pho- tos will appear ina future issue of Fire Management Today. In addi- tion, winners in each category will receive: 1st place—Camera equipment worth $300 and a16- by20-inch framed copy of your photo. 2nd place—An11- by14-inch framed copy of your photo. 3rd place—An8- by10-inch framed copy of your photo. Categories • Wildland fire • Prescribed fire • Wildland-urban interface fire • Aerial resources • Ground resources • Miscellaneous (fire effects; fire weather; fire-dependent commu- nities or species; etc.) Rules • The contest is open to everyone. You may submit an unlimited number of entries from any place or time; but for each image, you must indicate only one competi- tion category. To ensure fair eval- uation, we reserve the right to change the competition category for your image. • An original color slide ispre- ferred; however, we will accept high-quality color prints with negatives. • Digitally shot slides (preferred) or prints will be accepted if they are scanned at300 lines per inch or equivalent. Digital images will be accepted ifyou used a camera with at least 2.5 megapixels and the image is shot atthe highest resolution orin a TIFF format. To ensure fair evaluation, digital- ly manipulated images will be accepted only ifthe manipulation corrected technical flaws (such as exposure and focus) that could also be corrected ina convention- al darkroom. • You must have the right to grant the Forest Service unlimited useof the image, and you must agree that the image will become pub- lic domain. • The image must not have been previously published. • For every image you submit, you must give a detailed caption. For example: A Sikorsky S–64 Skycrane deliv- ers retardant onthe 1996 Clark Peak Fire, Coronado National Forest, AZ. • You must complete and sign a statement granting rights touse your image(s) tothe USDA Forest Service (see sample statement below). Include your full name, agency or institutional affiliation (ifany), home or business address, telephone number, ande-mail address, ifany. • Images are eliminated from com- petition if they have date stamps; show unsafe firefighting practices (unless that is their express pur- pose); orare oflow technical quality (for example, have soft focus or show camera move- ment). • The contest judges have signifi- cant photography experience, and their decision is final. Postmark Deadline First Friday in March Send submissions to: USDA Forest Service Fire Management Today Photo Contest Madelyn Dillon 2150 Centre Avenue Building A, Suite 361 Fort Collins, CO 80526 Example Release Statement and Contact Information Enclosed is/are _________(number) slide(s)/print(s)/digital image(s) for publication bythe USDA Forest Service. For each image submitted, the contest category is indicated anda detailed caption is enclosed. I have the authority to give permission to theForest Service to publish the enclosed image(s) andam aware that, if used, it/they will bein the public domain and appear onthe World Wide Web. Contact information: Name __________________________________________Institution affiliation, if any______________________________________ Home or business address________________________________________________________________________________________ Telephone number ________________________________E-mail address ________________________________________________
