Department of Agriculture Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research Station Research Paper RMRS-RP-9 September 1998 with the 1994 South Canyon Fire on Storm King Mountain, Colorado Bret W. Butler Roberta A. Bartlette Larry S. Bradshaw Jack D. Cohen Patricia L. Andrews Ted Putnam Richard J. Mangan
Dedication Tragically, 14 firefighters died during the fire runon the afternoon of July 6, 1994, onthe South Canyon Fire. We dedicate this study to their memory with the hope that by learning from their sacrifice, future firefighter lives will be saved. Kathi Beck Tami Bickett Scott Blecha Levi Brinkley Robert Browning Doug Dunbar Terri Hagen Bonnie Holtby Rob Johnson Jon Kelso Don Mackey Roger Roth James Thrash Richard Tyler
Lightning ignited the South Canyon Fire onthe afternoon of July 2, 1994. For the next 48 hours, the fire burned downslope inthe leaves, twigs, and cured grasses covering the ground surface. By 1200 on July 4the fire had burned approximately 3 acres. It contin- uedto spread downslope through the day on July 5, covering approximately 50 acres bythe endof the day. General fire activity consisted oflow intensity downslope spread with intermittent flareups and short duration upslope runs inthe fire’s interior. The fire remained active through the night covering approxi- mately 127 acres by morning on July 6. On July 6the fire continued to burn downslope through the surface fuels. At approximately 1520 adry cold front passed over the area. Winds inthe bottom ofthe drainage immediately west ofthe ignition point were estimated tobe from the south (upcanyon) at30 to45 miles per hour. About 1555 several upslope fire runs occurred inthe grass and conifers onthe west- facing slope near the southwest corner ofthe fire’s interior. Shortly after the crown fire runs, witnesses observed fire inthe bottom ofthe drainage, directly west ofthe ridgetop ignition point. Pushed bythe upcanyon winds, the fire inthe drainage spread rapidly north. As this fire spread north and east, fuel, slope, and wind conditions combined to result in sustained fire spread through the live green Gambel oak canopy. The fire began burning asa high-inten- sity fast-moving continuous front. We estimate that the fire moved north upthe drainage at about 3 feet per second. Steep slopes and strong west winds triggered frequent upslope (eastward) fire runs to- ward the top ofthe ridge. These upslope runs spread at6 to9 feet per second. A short time later the fire overran and killed 14 firefighters. The South Canyon Fire tragically demonstrates the fire behavior that can occur given the appropriate combination of influencing factors. While fire behavior during the afternoon of July 6, 1994, canbe character- ized as extreme, itwas normal and could be expected given the environmental conditions. Similar align- ments of fire environment factors and the resulting fire behavior are not uncommon. The uncommon and tragic fact associated with this fire was that 14 fire- fighters were entrapped and killed byit. This study focuses ontwo events: the blowup or transition from surface fire toa fire burning through the shrub canopy, and the fire behavior inthe area iden- tified asthe West Flank that resulted inthe deaths of14 firefighters. We identify three major factors that contributed tothe blowup onthe afternoon of July 6, 1994. The first was the presence of fire inthe bottom ofa steep narrow canyon. Second, strong upcanyon winds push- ing the fire upthe canyon and upslope. Third, the fire burning into the green (not previously underburned) Gambel oak canopy. We have drawn a number of discussion points from the analysis. Some of these points will be readily apparent to firefighters. Others maybe less evident. We believe that all are important. They are: • Topography can dramatically influence local wind patterns. • Vegetation and topography can reduce firefighter’s ability tosee a fire or other influencing factors. • Current and past fire behavior often does not indicate the potential fire behavior that could occur. • The longer a fire burns and the larger it gets the greater the likelihood of high-intensity fire behav- iorat some location around the perimeter. • The transition from a slow-spreading, low-inten- sity fire toa fast-moving, high-intensity fire often occurs rapidly. This seems to surprise firefighters most often in live fuels. • Escape route effectiveness should be consid- ered in relation to potential maximum-intensity fire behavior rather than past or present fire behavior. • The underburned Gambel oak did not contribute tothe blowup. Itwas significant in that itdid not provide a safety zone. • Smoke can significantly reduce the firefighter’s abilities to sense changes in fire behavior. Rocky Mountain Research Station 324 25th Street Ogden, UT 84401 Executive Summary
Bret W. Butler isa Research Mechanical Engineer inthe Fire Behavior Research Work Unit atthe Rocky Mountain Research Station’s Intermountain Fire Science Laboratory in Missoula, MT. His research focuses on fundamental heat and combustion processes in wildland fire. Applications for his research include fire behavior models, links between fire behavior and effects, and firefighter safety. He came tothe Forest Service in 1992 after receiving aPh.D. degree in mechanical engineering from Brigham Young University, Provo, UT, where he studied energy transport in particle laden flames. Roberta A. Bartlette isa Forester atthe Intermountain Fire Sciences Laboratory in Missoula, MT, where she began working in 1968. She has been involved in studies of fuel beds, smoldering combustion, and fire behavior of both laboratory and wildland fires. Recent work includes studies inthe useof satellite remote sensing to assess fire potential in wildland vegetation and the useof Geographic Informa- tion Systems to document wildfire growth. She has aB.A. degree in zoology andan M.S. degree in forestry from the University of Montana. Larry S. Bradshaw isa Meteorologist for the Fire Behavior Research Work Unit atthe Intermountain Fire Sciences Laboratory in Missoula, MT. He received aB.S. degree in meteorology from the University of Utah in 1975. From 1975 to 1992, Larry was with Systems for Environmental Man- agement, a nonprofit research organization located in Missoula. Since joining the Forest Service in 1992, hehas specialized inthe development and application of climatol- ogyto fire management problems and has authored several nationally available computer programs inthe field. Jack D. Cohen isa Research Physical Scientist for the Fire Behavior Research Work Unit atthe Intermountain Fire Sciences Laboratory in Missoula, MT. Hehas worked on wildland fire issues in Montana, Colorado, California, and Georgia since 1972. His fire research experience includes prescribed fire, fire danger rating, fire behavior, and the wildland/urban interface. His operational fire experience includes firefighting, fire behavior analyst assignments, and prescribed fire lighting supervision. Hehas aB.S. degree in forest science from the University of Montana andan M.S. degree in bioclimatology from Colorado State University. Patricia L. Andrews isa Research Physical Scientist inthe Fire Behavior Research Work Unit atthe Intermountain Fire Sciences Laboratory in Missoula, MT. She has been a member ofthe work unit since 1973 and was Project Leader from 1992 to 1996. She was primary developer ofthe BEHAVE fire behavior prediction system. Recent work includes fire growth simulation and analysis of fire danger rating systems. She has aB.A. degree in mathematics and chemistry from Montana State University at Billings, andan University of Montana. Ted Putnam isan Equipment Specialist atthe USDA Forest Service Missoula Technology and Development Center. He started working for the Forest Service in 1963 and spent 3 years on District fire crews, 8 years asa smokejumper, and3 years asa supervisory smokejumper. Hehas been work- ingat the Missoula Technology and Development Center since 1976. In 1977 he received aPh.D. degree in experi- mental psychology with a major in learning and minor in mathematics from the University of Montana. Heis now responsible for developing wildland firefighter protective clothing, and fire shelters, including training materials, and has been actively involved in wildland fire entrapment inves- tigations since 1976. Heis a member oftwo National Fire Protective Association standards setting committees for protective clothing and equipment. Richard J. Mangan has been the Fire and Aviation Pro- gram Leader atthe USDA Forest Service Missoula Technol- ogy and Development Center since 1989. His major respon- sibilities include fire equipment development, wildland firefighter personal protective equipment, and smokejumper activities. Dick serves onthe National Wildfire Coordinating Group Fire Equipment and Safety and Health working teams, andis chair ofthe National Fire Protection Associa- tion 1977 Technical Committee (wildland fire personal pro- tective equipment). Heis red-card qualified asan Opera- tions Section Chief I, and serves as Operations Chief ona National Type 1 Overhead Team. Dick hasaB.S. degree in forestry from Humboldt State University, and more than 20 years experience on Ranger Districts and National Forests in Oregon and Washington; his last assignment before moving to Missoula wasas Fire Staff Officer onthe Ochoco National Forest in Prineville, OR. Acknowledgments We authors express our sincere appreciation tothe many firefighters who endured repeated questions regarding of- ten painful memories ofthe South Canyon Fire. Those deserving special credit for their patience include Sonny Archuleta, Sarah Doehring, Kevin Erickson, Dick Good, Eric Hipke, Dale Longanecker, Tony Petrilli, Michelle Ryerson, Bryan Scholz, Tom Shepard, and Bill Thomas. Special thanks goto Sue Husari for providing detailed information about the specific fire behavior. We appreciate the willing- ness of author John N. Maclean to share his interview notes with us. We also acknowledge the contribution of time and effort bythe many technical reviewers and the Ogden Publications Office. Their comments ledto a significantly improved manuscript. Finally, we acknowledge the ultimate sacrifice bythe 14 firefighters who died during the South Canyon Fire. We hope that information gained from this work will protect the lives of other firefighters inthe future.
The tragic loss of14 lives on July 6, 1994, ona fire in western central Colorado stunned both firefighters and nonfirefighters everywhere. Immediately after the incident, one question on everyone’s mind was, “Why and how did this happen?” The Federal agencies involved inthe fire launched an official investigation. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration launched a separate investiga- tion. The first official report onthe accident was released 5 weeks after the incident. Other reports followed within a year. Investigators attempted to reconstruct the sequence of events and decisions that occurred onthe fire. However, their efforts were hampered bythe short timeframe allo- cated for the report and difficulties associated with getting witnesses to talk objectively about a fire that killed some of their closest friends. One year after the original report was published, different theories were still being proposed to explain the specific fire behavior. These theories included speculation about the source ofthe fire inthe West Drainage. For example: wasit caused by rolling debris, general dowhill fire spread, or spotting? Rumors of arson even surfaced. Other theories postulated the buildup and explosion ofa cloud of combus- tible gases that killed the firefighters. Ted Putnam, a Forest Service expert on firefighter en- trapments anda member ofthe original accident investiga- tion team, found the position ofthe bodies and gear tobe significantly different from what hehad observed onany previous entrapments. This generated inhis mind ques- tions about the fire behavior leading upto the entrapments. These questions and those associated with the various fire the site ofthe South Canyon Fire and work with himto better understand the fire’s behavior. After a visit tothe South Canyon Fire site in August 1995, the group organized an informal team to reconstruct the fire behavior in greater detail than the original accident inves- tigation report. The original accident investigation report presented im- portant and timely information, but the investigators were limited by time constraints. We have hada much longer time to review all the original witness statements and personally talk with many ofthe witnesses in considerable detail. The process entailed much more time than originally planned. But, because wehad no time limitations, we were able to determine details not covered inthe earlier reports. This report isnot meant to replace anyof the previous work bythe original investigation teams. Rather, our objec- tive isto provide a thorough account ofthe fire behavior. As with any effort aimed at reconstructing an incident involving humans and complex physical phenomena, itis virtually impossible to know the sequence of events with absolute surety. This report presents what we consider tobe the most probable fire behavior scenarios given the available information and current state of fire behavior knowledge. Wedo not address related issues such as human behavior factors orthe ability of currently available fire models to predict extreme fire behavior. These other issues, while certainly germane to wildland fire management and firefighter safety, are left for future studies. Our primary objective isto develop information to help firefighters rec- ognize potentially dangerous conditions, thereby prevent- ing future accidents. The Authors, September 1998
Page Introduction ....................................................................................................................1 Fire Behavior Overview..................................................................................................3 Summary of Critical Factors Influencing the Fire Behavior .....................................6 Fire Environment............................................................................................................6 Topography .............................................................................................................7 Fuels .....................................................................................................................13 Weather.................................................................................................................16 Fire Chronology............................................................................................................22 July 2to Evening of July 5—Low Intensity Downslope Spread.............................25 July 5, 2230 to July 6, 1530—Continued Downslope Spread ...............................25 July 6, 1530 to 1600—Double Draw Crown Fire Runs and Spot Fire on Main Ridge....................................................................................................28 July 6, 1600 to 1603—Fire Crosses West Drainage .............................................32 July 6, 1603 to 1609—Fire Moves Up West Drainage ..........................................32 July 6, 1609 to 1610—Fire on West Flank ............................................................35 July 6, 1610 to 1611—Fire Below West Flank Fireline..........................................38 July 6, 1611 to 1614—Firefighters on West Flank Fireline Overrun......................39 July 6, 1614 to 1623—Helitack Firefighters Overrun.............................................46 July 6, 1622 to 1830—Smokejumpers Deploy in Shelters on Lunch Spot Ridge..........................................................................................................46 July 6, 1830 to July 11—Search and Rescue, and Fire Burns to Glenwood Springs..............................................................................................50 Fire Behavior Discussion .............................................................................................51 Fire in South Endof West Drainage......................................................................51 Winds Push Fire into Bowl.....................................................................................54 Fire Transitions to Gambel Oak Canopy ...............................................................54 Fire on West Flank ................................................................................................56 Conclusions..................................................................................................................63 References...................................................................................................................66 Appendix A: Glossary...................................................................................................67 Appendix B: Chronology, Fire Behavior, Weather, Distances, Firefighter Travel Rates, and Fire Spread Rates .......................................................................69 Chronology, Fire Behavior, and Weather ..............................................................69 Distances...............................................................................................................76 Firefighter Travel Rates.........................................................................................77 Fire Spread Rates .................................................................................................80 Appendix C: Mesoscale Meteorological Model............................................................81The useof trade or firm names in this publication isfor reader information and does not imply endorsement bythe U.S. Department of Agriculture orany product or service
Introduction ______________________________________________________ Wildfires burned millions of acres in 1994 (Russo and Williams 1995). A lightning strike toa ridge ignited oneof those fires on July 2, 1994. This fire, named the South Canyon Fire, occurred approximately 7 miles west of Glenwood Springs, CO (fig. 1). For the next 3 days the South Canyon Fire burned down the slopes inthe litter, debris, and grass covering the ground with occasional short duration upslope runs and torching of individual or small groups of shrubs and trees. By late morning on July 6the fire covered approximately 127 acres. At about 1520 (all times are mountain daylight saving time given in24 hour format) adry cold front passed over the area. At about 1600 and for the next 4 hours the fire burned generally north and east through the shrub and tree canopies asa fast moving wind-driven front. It exhibited dramatically greater rates of spread, flame heights, and energy release rates than atany time since its ignition. The South Canyon Fire eventually burned 2,115 acres and was declared controlled on July 11, 1994. This fire will notbe remembered for the acreage burned, but for the lives lost. Onthe afternoon of July 6, 1994, fire entrapped and killed 14 firefighters, making the South Canyon Fire oneof the most tragic wildland fires to occur inthe United States this century. Immediately following the accident an interagency team was formed to conduct an official investigation into the causes ofthe fatalities. The “Report ofthe South Canyon Fire Accident Investigation Team” (USDA, USDI, and USDC 1994), hereafter referred toas South Canyon Report, was released in August 1994. A followup report, titled the “Report ofthe Interagency Management Review Team (South Canyon Fire)” was released in October 1994 (IMRT 1994). This second report presented a corrective action plan for improved firefighter safety based on findings from the first report. A final report titled “Final Report ofthe Interagency Management Review Team” was issued in June 1995 (IMRT 1995). This report summarized accomplish- ments since release ofthe corrective action plan and made further recom- mendations for improved firefighter safety. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration also investigated the incident and presented a report (OSHA 1995). the 1994 South Canyon Fire on Storm King Mountain, Colorado Bret W. Butler Roberta A. Bartlette Larry S. Bradshaw Jack D. Cohen Patricia L. Andrews Ted Putnam Richard J. Mangan
Figure 1—Overview of South Canyon Fire location (notto scale). Time constraints limited the original accident investigative team from studying the fire behavior in detail. This report presents a more detailed picture, than has been presented previously, ofthe factors that ledto the dramatic change in fire behavior on July 6, 1994. Information and data were gathered from many sources including investigation reports, firefighter interviews, site visits, and related scientific literature. The information presented in this document refines previous work bythe accident investigators. Unfortunately, during most wildfires, there is little documented quantita- tive information about the fire spread during times when the fire is most active. Such was the case for the South Canyon Fire. Given the lack of quantitative fire behavior data, we reconstructed the fire behavior from witness statements and information about the vegetation, topography, and weather present atthe time ofthe fire. To accomplish this we first developed a detailed chronology of firefighter locations and movement during the time of interest. The chronological history for the afternoon of July 6, 1994, occupies a significant portion of this report. We believe that this information
ments about the location and behavior ofthe fire and the chronology, we were able to develop a sequence of fire perimeters. The behavior exhibited bythe South Canyon Fire on July 6, 1994, was extreme in terms of intensity; butit can also be termed normal for the fuel, weather, and topographical conditions present atthe time. Similar alignments of influencing factors and the resulting fire behavior are not uncommon. We present a summary ofthe South Canyon Fire and some key factors that influenced the fire behavior. We describe the topography, the vegetation or fuel, and weather present during the fire. This is followed with a chronologi- cal narrative of firefighter movements and fire perimeter locations prior toand during the blowup and entrapments. Finally, key fire behavior points are discussed and summarized. Our reconstruction ofthe fire behavior is based on best estimates of fire spread rates, firefighter travel times, and witness statements. When specific statements or information from witnesses are used, we cite the source. We frequently use the terms “intensity” and “blowup.” Inthe general sense, “intensity” implies the size ofthe flames, the fire’s spread rate, and the rate of energy release from the fire. “Blowup” indicates a rapid change from alow intensity surface fire, toa high intensity fire burning through the whole vegetation complex, surface to canopy, and demonstrating dramatically larger flame heights, higher energy release rates, and faster rates of spread. We define other terms used in this report in appendix A. Fire Behavior Overview ____________________________________________ Figures 2and 3 present a closer view ofthe fire location and points of interest tothe fire narrative. Lightning ignited the South Canyon Fire onthe afternoon of July 2, 1994, onthe south endof the Main Ridge. For the next 48 hours, the fire backed down the slope inthe surface litter of leaves, twigs, and grasses. The fire behavior consisted of generally low intensity downslope spread with occa- sional short duration upslope runs and torching inthe Gambel oak (Quercus gambelii) canopy and single or small groups of conifers. By 1200 on July 4the fire had burned approximately 3 acres. It continued burning through the day and covered approximately 11 acres by 2200. By 0800 on July 5, the fire covered 29 acres. It continued to spread downslope through the day on July 5, leaving many unburned islands of vegetation. Bythe endof the day, the fire had burned approximately 50 acres. General fire activity consisted oflow intensity downslope spread with intermittent flareups and short duration upslope runs inthe fire’s interior. The fire remained active through the night covering approximately 127 acres by morning on July 6. Even though the fire more than doubled in size between late evening on July 5and the morning of July 6, its spread rate remained consistent with that displayed during the previous days. Onthe morning of July 6the fire continued to burn downslope through the surface fuels with isolated torching of individual tree crowns and short upslope runs inthe fire’s interior. Flareups, small reburns, and slopovers characterized fire activity through the late morning and early afternoon. By midafternoon, westerly winds blowing over the tops ofthe north-south oriented ridges were increasing. At approximately 1520 adry cold front
Figure 2—Oblique sketch of west-facing slope ofthe Main Ridge. Perspective is looking northeast. Inset shows specific topographical features and locations of interest tothe narrative. Heavy black line is approximate location ofthe West Flank Fireline (notto scale). passed over the area. Winds inthe bottom ofthe West Drainage were estimated tobe from the south (upcanyon) at30 to45 miles per hour. About 1555 several upslope fire runs occurred inthe grass and conifer crowns onthe west-facing slope near the southwest corner ofthe fire’s interior. Some narrow upslope fire runs and flareups inthe underburned oak canopy onthe upper portion ofthe West Flank near the Main Ridge occurred around the same time. Shortly after the crown fire runs, witnesses observed fire inthe bottom ofthe West Drainage near the base ofthe Double Draws. Pushed bythe upcanyon winds, the fire inthe West Drainage spread rapidly north. As this fire spread north and east, fuel, slope, and wind conditions combined to push the fire into the live Gambel oak canopy. Firefighters onthe West Flank Fireline andon the Main Ridge perceived the fire tobe burning asa wide front moving north and east upthe West Drainage and across the West Flank. We estimate that the fire moved north upthe drainage at about 3 feet per second. Steep slopes and strong west
winds triggered frequent upslope (eastward) fire runs toward the top ofthe Main Ridge. These upslope runs spread through the Gambel oakat 6to 9 feet per second (appendix B, table B-8). The combination of steep slopes, strong winds, and flammable fuels resulted ina fire that entrapped and killed 12 firefighters onthe northeast endof the West Flank Fireline. Two other firefighters, who moved north upthe Main Ridge then northwest toward an exposed rocky face, died ina narrow gulley when overrun bythe fire. The surviving firefighters exited the area by moving out the East Drainage to Interstate Highway 70 along the Colorado River. Figure 3—Aerial photograph of fire site. The perspective is looking southeast across the West Drainage toward the West Flank. The West Flank Fireline canbe seen asa faint trail approximately inthe center ofthe photograph. The Lunch Spot Ridge runs from H-1 through the Lunch Spot toa point near the bottom ofthe drainage. The Colorado River Gorge runs east to west andis behind H-1and the Ignition point. H-2is located northeast along the Main Ridge, off the left side ofthe picture. J. Kautz, U.S. Forest Service, Missoula, MT.
Onthe afternoon of July 6, 1996, the fire rapidly changed from a relatively slow-moving fire burning downslope through the dead leaves and stems onthe ground toa fast-moving fire burning upslope through the vegetation canopy. Some ofthe factors that caused the transition were fire atthe base of steep slopes containing significant areas of grass and pinyon-juniper (Pinus edulis and Juniperus sp.), steep terrain, strong turbulent winds, and involvement ofthe leaves and stems inthe vegetation canopy. Following isa brief review of these factors. Steep, Complex Terrain—Topography wasa major contributor tothe fire behavior demonstrated on July 6. Fire spread rapidly up steep slopes. Whether ignited by burning brands lofted from a crown fire runor simply a result ofthe backing fire that had burned through the previous night and day, fire was burning near the bottom ofthe West Drainage by 1555 on July 6. The presence of fire atthe base of steep slopes covered with unburned vegetation had the potential for rapid upslope runs, even inthe absence of strong winds. Strong, Turbulent, and Variable Winds—Low level westerly winds accompanying the cold front increased as they passed from the relatively open and broad canyon west ofthe fire area into the narrow Colorado River Gorge. The relative orientation ofthe West Drainage and the Colorado River Gorge redirected a portion ofthe westerly winds inthe Gorge upthe West Drainage. These winds caused fire growth and spotting while pushing the fire north and east upthe West Drainage. Asthe flank ofthe fire burned upthe west-facing slope itwas increasingly exposed tothe westerly flow. The strong westerly winds and steep slopes caused rapid fire runs tothe Main Ridge. Therefore, the fire was spreading steadily tothe north upthe West Drainage with frequent fast-moving eastward-directed runs tothe Main Ridge. This type of behavior has been termed “hook and run.” The strong winds increased the number of spot fires and also the spotting distance. Involvement of Live Fuels—The relatively low intensity fire behavior exhibited bythe backing surface fire previous tothe blowup did not indicate the potential for high intensity behavior inthe live vegetation canopy. The strong updrainage winds and steep slopes caused the flaming zone ofthe fire burning inthe dead litter and grass to increase in size sufficiently that the green Gambel oak canopy began burning. The green nonburned Gambel oak carried the fire into the previously underburned Gambel oak. The critical factors to fire spread inthe vegetation canopy were exposure toa large flaming front, steep slopes, strong winds, low fine dead fuel moisture content, and moderately low live fuel moisture content. Fire Environment__________________________________________________ This section isa short summary ofthe fire environment onthe afternoon of July 6, 1994. First we discuss the topography. Next we discuss the condition ofthe vegetation or fuels inthe area. Finally, we summarize the long-term and short-term weather related factors that influenced the fire behavior. For the purposes of this study, we have attempted touse the same location names as were used inthe original investigation report. However, we have
specific locations bya dominant geographical feature. Topography The fire occurred ina topographically complex area. The highest peak inthe area, Storm King Mountain, is over 8,700 feet in elevation. The terrain south ofthe peak falls ina series of steep rugged broken ravines, gullies, and ridges tothe Colorado River (elevation approximately 5,680 feet). Figures 4and 5 present an aerial photograph and topographical mapof the fire area. Figures 3, 6, 7, and8 are aerial oblique photographs ofthe fire site from different view angles. Main Ridge—Upto the afternoon of July 6, 1994, the South Canyon Fire burned onthe southwest side of Storm King Mountain. Oneof the main ridges between the mountain and the Colorado River Gorge is locally known as Hellsgate Ridge, we refer toit asthe Main Ridge. The northeastern endof the Main Ridge begins asa saddle atthe southern base of Storm King Mountain. The two firefighters working helitack were killed ina steep rocky chute northwest of this area. From the saddle the Main Ridge runs tothe southwest for about 3,700 feet where it abruptly ends atthe Colorado River Gorge. Ignition Point—A lightning strike tothe topof the southwest-most knob ofthe Main Ridge (elevation 6,980 feet) ignited the South Canyon Fire. Tothe south from the Ignition Point the terrain falls steeply (about a55 percent slope) to Interstate 70and the Colorado River. East and West Drainages—The Main Ridge is flanked onthe east and west bytwo north-south oriented drainages. These drainages are referred toas the East and West Drainages. Both drainages were formed by erosion ofthe sandstone rock and soil. Fine sand fills the bottom ofthe drainages with intermittent large sandstone boulders. The West Drainage follows a twisting path north from the Colorado River Gorge. The bottom ofthe West Drainage isa steep-sided (80 percent slope) ravine. The West Drainage channeled air from the Colorado River Gorge north tothe base of Storm King Mountain. The fire changed from a backing surface fire moving down the slope toa fast spreading fire burning upslope and upcanyon through the shrub and tree canopies inthe West Drainage. Surviving firefighters exited via the East Drainage. The fire burned through the East Drainage about 30 minutes after the firefighters exited it. Lunch Spot and Spur Ridges—Two spur ridges that are important tothe narrative extend west from the Main Ridge down into the West Drainage. The southernmost ridge, referred toas the Lunch Spot Ridge, was where the firefighters who had been building fireline down the West Flank ofthe fire ate lunch onthe afternoon of July 6 (fig. 3 through 6and 8). Eight smokejumpers deployed and survived in fire shelters onthe upper portion ofthe Lunch Spot Ridge during the afternoon of July 6, 1994. One smokejumper survived near the Lunch Spot without deploying a fire shelter. A second smaller ridge, located about 1,400 feet north ofthe Lunch Spot Ridge, we call the Spur Ridge. The Spur Ridge serves asa point of reference when discussing firefighter, helicopter, and fire location and movement.
Figure 4—Aerial overhead view of South Canyon Fire site. Note the East and West Drainages, the Main Ridge, Interstate Highway 70, and Colorado River Gorge. The Canyon Creek Estates subdivision is shown directly west ofthe fire site. The helibase was located atthe subdivision. Photo source: Grand Junction District ofthe BLM, U.S. Department of Interior
Figure 5—Topographical mapof fire area. Heavy dark dashed line identifies firelines on West Flank andon Main Ridge. These firelines were constructed on July 6, 1994. Helispots H-1and H-2—Two helispots were constructed onthe Main Ridge. The first helispot (designated H-1) was constructed on July 5and wasat the junction ofthe Main Ridge and Lunch Spot Ridge at about 7,000 feet elevation onan unnamed knob. It consisted ofan area approximately 50 feet in diameter that was cleared of brush and trees. Stumps and ground litter remained. A second helispot (H-2) was constructed onthe morning of July 6. H-2was at6,760 feet elevation and was about 1⁄4 mile north ofH-1. This helispot was smaller than H-1and was situated ina small saddle from which the brush had been cleared away. Double Draws—The southwest face ofthe Main Ridge near H-1 falls steeply (approximately 55 percent slope) dropping more than 1,000 feet in elevation tothe bottom ofthe West Drainage. The Double Draws areon this
Figure 6—Aerial oblique photograph ofthe West Flank from a position above the north endof the West Drainage. This photo gives a good perspective ofthe Main Ridge between H-2and H-1. steep west-facing slope. They consist oftwo steep chimneylike gullies leading into the West Drainage. They originate approximately one-third the way down the slope below H-1and were formed by erosion ofthe loose soil (fig. 5and 8). Several crown fire runs occurred south ofthe Double Draws shortly before the fire suddenly began burning upthe West Drainage onthe afternoon of July 6, 1994. Bowl—A small bowl (approximately 1⁄2 acre) isin the bottom ofthe West Drainage about 250 feet north ofthe intersection ofthe Double Draws and the J. Kautz, U.S. Forest Service, Missoula, MT.
Figure 7—Aerial oblique photograph from the upper East Drainage looking southwest. Note the nearly complete consumption of Gambel oak. West Drainage. This area is referred toas the Bowl. The accumulation of live and dead fuel inthe Bowl contributed tothe development ofthe fire that spread upthe West Drainage. West Bench—Northeast ofthe junction ofthe West Drainage and the Lunch Spot Ridge isthe West Bench. This area is approximately 80 feet above the bottom ofthe West Drainage. The West Bench is approximately 150 feet wide and 450 feet long with the long side oriented parallel tothe West Drainage. While not flat (approximately 15 percent slope), the West Bench J. Kautz, U.S. Forest Service, Missoula, MT.
Figure 8—Aerial view of South Canyon Fire site looking north upthe West Drainage toward Storm King Mountain from a location over the Colorado River. Note green vegetation on south side ofthe Lunch Spot Ridge. J. Kautz, U.S. Forest Service, Missoula, MT.
grassy openings was the dominant vegetation onthe West Bench. Gambel oak completely covered the slopes between the West Bench and the Main Ridge. West Flank Fireline—This fireline is approximately 2,100 feet long with the Lunch Spot atits southernmost point. From the Main Ridge, the West Flank Fireline leads west down the steep (about 55 percent) slope for 300 feet. From the base of this first steep pitch the fireline continues, ata much flatter slope (about 10 percent), another 380 feet down and across the slope tothe Spur Ridge. It leads over the Spur Ridge, turns tothe southwest, and follows a contour route across the West Flank slope for about 800 feet. From this point it contours 400 feet diagonally across and down the slope, leading generally southwest, and then climbs 200 feet upa 65 percent slope tothe Lunch Spot. Several points of interest onthe West Flank Fireline are identified by their major topographical features. Distance along the fireline from the junction ofthe Main Ridge and the Fireline are given in parentheses. The points are: the Zero Point (0 feet); the Fatality Site (120to 280 feet); the Tree (200 feet); the Draw atthe base ofthe first steep pitch inthe fireline (445 feet); the Spur Ridge (680 feet); the Stump (850 feet); two other locations (1,450 and 1,880 feet) are important tothe fire chronology presented later. Allof these points are shown in figure 3. All distances are detailed in appendix B, table B-2. Zero Point—The junction ofthe Main Ridge and the topof the fireline constructed onthe West Flank isan important geographical location when specifying specific firefighter locations and movement. For the purposes of this report, itis referred toas the Zero Point. We found it helpful to reference distances along the Main Ridge and the fireline from this point. For example, helispot H-1is 790 feet south along the Main Ridge from the Zero Point and helispot H-2is 560 feet north along the Main Ridge from the Zero point. Drop Zone—The smokejumper Drop Zone was near the Saddle onthe north endof the Main Ridge (approximately 1,000 feet north ofH-2). Fuels Vegetation inthe area consisted primarily of Gambel oak (Quercus gambelii) onthe north- and west-facing slopes and open, mixed pinyon-juniper (Pinus edulis and Juniperus sp.) with a cured grass understory onthe south-, southwest-, and east-facing slopes. Afew “pockets” of Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii) existed inthe area ofthe Double Draws, the Bowl, andon the lower east-facing slope ofthe West Drainage. Continuous cured grasses and some shrubs and small stands of pinyon-juniper covered the bottom ofthe north- south oriented West Drainage (Anon 1994). The Bowl contained a heavier concentration of grasses, mixed shrubs, woody debris, and trees. Figure 9 shows the approximate distribution ofthe vegetation over the fire site. The Gambel oak was more than 50 years old and did not contain much dead material (South Canyon Report; Biastoch 1995). It formed a dense, green, continuous closed canopy, 6to 12 feet tall and appeared tobe unaffected by spring frosts (fig. 10). Visibility within the stand was limited. The surface fuels beneath the canopy consisted ofa 3to 6 inch layer of leaf litter (Husari 1996). Fine dead fuel moisture content was estimated to range from 2to 5 percent onthe afternoon of July 6 (South Canyon Report). Both the large diameter
(1000 hour) dead fuels and the live fuel moisture contents inthe area were several weeks ahead of their historical summer drying trends (South Canyon Report). No fuel moisture content samples were collected atthe time ofthe fire. However, live foliar moisture contents were measured on July 12, 1994, ata site near the South Canyon Fire with an aspect and elevation similar tothe west flank ofthe Main Ridge. Foliar moisture in underburned Gambel oak was about 60 percent while that in green unburned Gambel oak was 125 percent (South Canyon Report). Typically, live fuel moisture levels change relatively slowly in undamaged shrubs. Therefore, we expect the foliar moisture content ofthe unburned Gambel oakon July 6 would have been similar tothe values measured on July 12. No samples were collected inthe pinyon-juniper fuels. Figure 9—Drawing showing approximate distribution of vegetation in area of South Canyon Fire. Perspective is looking northeast across West Drainage from location over Colorado River (adapted from Accident Investigation Report, notto scale).
Figure 10—Photograph of Gambel oakat South Canyon Fire Site taken on July 6, 1994. Note lack of significant amount of dead leaves and stems inthe canopy. Courtesy ofT. Petrilli
Long Term—The South Canyon Fire Investigation report states that “weather significantly contributed tothe blowup ofthe fire.” Below normal precipitation (as compared tothe 30 year average) during the winter and spring of 1994 had pushed western Colorado into a severe drought (South Canyon Report). Precipitation levels at Glenwood Springs from October 1, 1993, through July 6, 1994, were 58 percent of normal. Accompanying the below-normal precipitation were much warmer than normal temperatures through May and June. This pattern persisted into July. Fires in western Colorado during the previous weeks had exhibited rapid spread rates and long range spotting, both characteristic of drier than average conditions. July 5, 1994—On this day, weak high pressure aloft anda hot, dry air mass covered western Colorado. Upper level winds were light from the southwest through 14,000 feet and then increased to30 miles per hour at16,000 feet. At Grand Junction, CO, the lower atmosphere was dry and unstable as indicated bya Haines Index of6 (Haines 1988). That morning a strong cold front developed in western Idaho. The front was associated with an unsea- sonably cold upper level low pressure system, centered over northern Oregon. By late afternoon the cold front extended from eastern Idaho into central Nevada. Weare not aware ofany weather observations taken by firefighters working onthe fire. The closest remote automatic weather station (RAWS) was southwest ofthe airport at Rifle, CO, approximately 10 miles west ofthe fire site. We assume that the measurements from Rifle are representative ofthe conditions over the South Canyon Fire. Between 0100 and 0600 on July 5the relative humidity atthe Rifle RAWS ranged from 10to 40 percent. Relative humidity remained near 11 percent until after midnight (fig. 11). Winds atthe Rifle RAWS were light and variable through the morning and late afternoon of July 5, 1994 (fig. 12). By 1800 on July 5, 1994, winds over the South Canyon Fire area were blowing generally from the south at10 to15 miles per hour with gusts to20 miles per hour (South Canyon Report; Bell 1994). July 6, 1994—At 0600 this day, the cold front extended from central Wyoming across northwest Colorado into southwestern Utah (fig. 13). Relative humidity at Rifle reached a high of29 percent at about 0700 as compared to40 percent the previous date (fig. 11). The lower relative humidity during the early hours of July 6 enhanced burning during the night. This is supported by witness statements that the fire was more active through the night on July 5 than on previous nights. The front passed over Grand Junction around 1300 and caused the10 to15 mile per hour winds to increase to approximately 30 miles per hour (South Canyon Report). The front passed over the Rifle RAWS station between 1400 and 1500, as indicated by increased winds outof the west-southwest. They reached their peak at about 1600 with gusts to45 miles per hour. The relative humidity at Rifle reached a minimum of8 percent at 1700 on July 6. The winds at Rifle changed tothe northwest at 1900. They gradually decreased through the evening and were blowing less than 6 miles per hour by 2300 (fig. 12). Firefighters onthe fire andat Canyon Creek Estates, a residential subdivision about 2 miles west ofthe fire, noted an increase in winds between
Figure 11—Temperature and relative humidity measurements from the Rifle, CO, Remote Automatic Weather Station for period midnight on July 5, 1994, through 2300 on July 6, 1994. Figure 12—Wind speeds from the Rifle, CO, Remote Automatic Weather Station for period midnight on July 5, 1994, through 2300 on July 6, 1994.
Figure 13—Surface air pressure charts showing progression of cold front on July 6, 1994 (taken from original Accident Investi- gation Report). 1400 and 1430 (Scholz 1995). We surmise these were prefrontal winds associated with the approaching cold front. The Accident Investigation Team meteorologist estimated that the cold front passed over the South Canyon Fire at approximately 1520 (South Canyon Report). Witness statements characterized the winds as continuing to increase in speed, reaching their peak strength shortly after 1600. The original investigation report estimated southerly winds inthe West Drainage of20 to35 miles per hour and westerly winds blowing across the ridges of45 miles per hour at this time. Statements made by firefighters and the helicopter pilot suggest that itis likely that
ridges. Smokejumpers near the Lunch Spot at 1606 estimated upslope winds of30 to45 miles per hour (Petrilli 1995). Winds over the fire area remained strong until 2000 (South Canyon Report). Topography and Wind—There is inconsistent testimony in witness statements regarding winds inthe area ofthe fire. While the general flow was from the west, the direction and intensity ofthe winds varied significantly from one location to another (South Canyon Report; Shepard 1995). For example, firefighters working onthe Main Ridge stated that as they cleared away brush from the fireline they could throw it into the air and the wind would carry it over the side ofthe ridge. At nearly the same time firefighters working onthe northeast portion ofthe West Flank Fire Line (a location topographically sheltered from the wind) andat an exposed rocky outcrop- ping near H-1 stated they experienced almost no wind atall. Though inconsistent with each other, these observations are consistent with the character of surface winds in complex mountainous terrain, particularly when influenced by strong, synoptic-scale weather patterns. We feel topography was particularly influential onthe surface winds the afternoon of July 6. West ofthe fire site the Colorado River flows through a relatively open and broad canyon. The low level westerly winds accompany- ing the cold front passed through this canyon. The canyon narrows dramati- cally about 2 miles west ofthe mouth ofthe West Drainage then opens tothe east near Glenwood Springs (fig. 7and 14). Asthe wind flowed from the broad canyon into the narrow Colorado River Gorge it increased in speed (fig. 15). Several factors combined to create unusually strong upcanyon flow inthe bottom ofthe West Drainage. First was the topography near the mouth ofthe West Drainage. The orientation ofthe ridge running from the ignition point, west tothe Colorado River, acted asa “scoop” redirecting a portion ofthe westerly flow inthe Colorado River Gorge northward upthe bottom ofthe West Drainage (fig. 4and 5). Second, normal daytime heating ofthe upper slopes inthe West Drainage induced general upcanyon flow. This upcanyon flow resulted ina low pressure region atthe entrance tothe West Drainage, causing even more airto flow from the gorge into the drainage. Third, the increasingly strong westerly winds associated with the cold front evacuated air from the top ofthe West Drainage (fig. 16). This resulted in pressure- induced flow from the Colorado Gorge into the West Drainage. Some photographs and video footage taken during the blowup show smoke move- ment (Bell 1994) and clearly illustrate the complexity and turbulence ofthe surface winds shortly after 1610. High resolution meteorological modeling (see appendix C) supports the mesoscale wind analysis bythe Accident Investigation Team meteorologist.
Figure 14—Aerial oblique photograph looking north over the Main Ridge and Storm King Mountain from the south side ofthe Colorado River. Note the widening ofthe river gorge asit opens into Glenwood Springs. While not shown in this picture, the Colorado River Gorge again widens tothe west (off left side of photograph) ofthe fire site. Figure 15—Schematic diagram of venturi effect that caused increased local winds where the West Drainage meets the Colorado River Gorge (notto scale). J. Kautz, U.S. Forest Service, Missoula, MT.
Figure 16—The general air flow over the fire area atthe time ofthe crown fire runs south ofthe Double Draws (about 1555). The free air westerlies (light blue) evacuate the afternoon upslope flow (green) outof the upper endof the West Drainage. This creates an area of divergence inthe north endof the West Drainage. The topography and orientation ofthe mouth ofthe West Drainage redirected a portion ofthe strong winds inthe Colorado River Gorge (dark blue) upthe West Drainage (red). A shear zone is created where the westerly winds interact with the flow upthe West Drainage. Turbulent eddies created bythe shear zone may have enhanced burning near the Double Draw and along the Lunch Spot Ridge and West Bench. The eddies transported burning embers north upthe West Drainage. J. Kautz, U.S. Forest Service, Missoula, MT.
Oneof our major objectives wasto estimate fire spread rates during the afternoon of July 6. This canbe done using fire spread models orby calculating the distance and time separating successive fire perimeters. We chose the latter method; the original accident investigators used fire behav- ior models. Our method of analysis required that we develop a chronological history ofthe movement and location of individual firefighters. We used witness statements, followup interviews, onsite reenactment of firefighter movement, and calculations based on known physiological capabilities for hotshots and smokejumpers (Sharkey 1994). From the chronology and witness statements we constructed fire perimeter maps. These maps were then used to estimate fire spread rates. The following isa narrative of firefighter movements and fire behavior onthe South Canyon Fire for July 2 through July 6, 1994. Whenever possible, we describe events in chronological order. The location names are the same as those inthe original fire investigation report with some additional areas identified. Specific locations are identified in figure 17, an oblique photograph, and figure 18, a labeled topographical Figure 17—View looking northeast over West Flank from east-facing ridge across the West Drainage. The West Flank Fireline canbe seen starting atthe Main Ridge above the Tree and passing down the hill over the Spur Ridge and across the slope tothe Lunch Spot. J. Kautz, U.S. Forest Service, Missoula, MT.
map. Weuse surnames when referring to individual firefighters. Some titles are used. Full name and affiliation are available inthe South Canyon Fire investigation report. To make it easier for the reader to follow the chain of events surrounding the fire, we regularly refer to four separate firefighter groups (see table 1). These groups are identified by their general location at approximately 1530 hours on July 6. The groups are: (1) The Main Ridge Group, which consisted of part ofthe Prineville Interagency Hotshot crew anda Bureau of Land Management (BLM) andU.S. Forest Service crew dispatched from Grand Junction, CO; they all worked primarily along the top ofthe Main Ridge. (2) The West Flank Fireline Group consisting of nine Prineville Hotshots, seven Forest Service smokejumpers, and two BLM/USFS firefighters who worked onthe West Flank Fireline; three ofthe smokejumpers moved from the West Flank Fireline tothe Main Ridge before the entrapment. (3) The Lunch Spot Ridge Group, nine Forest Service smokejumpers who were working primarily south ofthe Lunch Spot Ridge inthe area ofthe Double Draws just prior to blowup; eight of this group eventually deployed in fire shelters onthe upper portion ofthe Lunch Spot Ridge, the ninth remained near the Lunch Spot. (4) The two helitack crewmembers (one Forest Service and one BLM) make upthe fourth group. A helicopter pilot was over the fire a portion ofthe time. Figure 18—Topographical map showing locations important to narrative. Mapis oriented south to north for use with figure 17. Dashed lines indicate firelines along West Flank and Main Ridge.
Reconstruction ofthe fire position and spread rates required that we accurately determine each group’s location and activity. Specific times are included inthe narrative to indicate the sequence of events andto commu- nicate the speed at which the events occurred. These times were determined by linking elapsed times between events such as helicopter ferry times, reenactment and timing of specific firefighter movements, and human physiological calculations totwo known clock times identified inthe witness statements. The times presented inthe narrative represent a “best fit estimate” and should notbe taken as absolute. When estimating fire spread rates, the sequencing and relative time differences between events areof more importance than the absolute times. A great deal of fire and crew activity occurred simultaneously among and between the separate groups making chronological description of both the fire behavior and firefighter positions difficult. We have attempted to divide the narrative into geographi- cal regions and have labeled paragraphs with the central location or group being discussed. We include inthe narrative weather and fire behavior as described by firefighters at various locations. The fire perimeters were developed from witness statements, time and distance measurements and estimates, and topographical, weather, and fuel information. Fire spread rates are estimated from elapsed times and dis- tances between successive fire perimeters. Tables of event times, distances, Main Ridge West Flank Lunch Spot Ridge Helitack Group Fireline Group Group Group Prineville Hotshots Prineville Hotshots Smokejumpers Helitack Bill Baker Kathi Beck Michael Cooper Robert Browning* Kip Gray Tami Bickett Mike Feliciano Richard Tyler* Tony Johnson Scott Blecha Dale Longanecker Brian Lee Levi Brinkley Tony Petrilli Helicopter Pilot Louie Navarro Doug Dunbar Quentin Rhoades Dick Good Tom Rambo Terri Hagen Eric Shelton Alex Robertson Bonnie Holtby Sonny Soto Bryan Scholz Rob Johnson Bill Thomas Tom Shepard* Jon Kelso Keith Woods Mike Simmons Kim Valentine BLM/U.S. Smokejumpers Forest Service Sonny Archuleta** Todd Abbott Sarah Doehring** Butch Blanco* Kevin Erickson** Jim Byers Eric Hipke Eric Christianson Don Mackey*** Mike Hayes Roger Roth Loren Paulson Jim Thrash Brian Rush Michelle Ryerson BLM/U.S. Forest Service Neal Shunk Derek Brixey** Brad Haugh** Firefighters listed in boldface type were killed onthe South Canyon Fire. *Positioned near H-2. **Moved from West Flank Fireline to Main Ridge before the entrapment. ***Moved from Lunch Spot Ridge to West Flank Fireline.
in appendix B. July 2to Evening of July 5—Low Intensity Downslope Spread Lightning ignited the South Canyon Fire onthe afternoon of July 2, 1994, near the southernmost point onthe Main Ridge. The fire was reported tothe county sheriff at 1030 andto the BLM district office at 1100 on July 3, 1994. The fire burned primarily inthe open pinyon-juniper fuel type, backing downslope in cured annual and perennial grasses with occasional upslope runs and torching. It grew to11 acres bythe evening of July 4 (fig. 19). The fire burned through the night of July 4, growing to29 acres by 0800 on July 5. It continued to spread down the slope inthe surface fuels beneath the pinyon-juniper and Gambel oak through the day on July 5. The direction of spread was mostly tothe north and west. Burning was not continuous and many unburned islands of fuel remained. On July 5 seven BLM firefighters, including Incident Commander Blanco, walked into the fire from the East Drainage. They cuta helispot (H-1) and began direct downhill fireline construction. About 1500 an airtanker made a retardant drop onthe fire burning onthe steep rocky slope above the interstate highway. The BLM firefighters left the fire at 1730 to refurbish their equipment. They hiked out the West Drainage. At approximately 1745, eight smokejumpers parachuted tothe Drop Zone. Jumper-in-Charge Mackey later radioed Incident Commander Blanco that the fire was burning actively and had crossed the fireline prepared bythe BLM crew earlier that day. After collecting their gear, the smokejumpers built a fireline along the east flank ofthe fire until the terrain became too steep. By 2230 on July 5the fire covered approximately 50 acres. July 5, 2230 to July 6, 1530—Continued Downslope Spread The fire continued to burn actively during the night, spreading asa surface fire downhill toward the West Drainage through the pinyon-juniper and grass and laterally tothe north through an area covered with Gambel oak. The fire maintained a more continuous flaming front and was much more active through the night of July 5and early morning of July 6 than ithad been the previous night (Bell 1994). We attribute the increased fire activity to lower relative humidities than occurred on previous nights. Between 0530 and 0600 on July 6, eleven BLM and Forest Service firefighters started hiking upthe East Drainage tothe fire. At 0800 the BLM/ USFS crew constructed H-2, a helispot located about 1⁄4 mile north ofH-1. Around 0845 Incident Commander Blanco and Jumper-in-Charge Mackey discussed strategy and tactics for the day. They decided to improve the fireline between H-1and H-2 (using the BLM and Forest Service firefighters) andto start building a fireline along the fire’s west flank (using the smokejumpers). At approximately 0930 they took a reconnaissance flight inthe helicopter assigned tothe fire. Ina later interview the pilot, Dick Good, said that on this flight he noticed smoke lowin the West Drainage (Good 1996). The fire perimeter map developed after the reconnaissance flight indicated that the fire covered about 127 acres (fig. 19). At 1027 eight more smokejumpers parachuted tothe Drop Zone north ofH-2. At 1130 the
combined jumper crews started downhill direct fireline construction onthe West Flank. Flareups, small reburns, and slopovers occurred throughout the fire late inthe morning. The figure 20 photograph, taken from Interstate 70, shows smoke from fire activity northwest ofH-1on the West Flank and also southwest ofH-1in the area near the Double Draws. At approximately 1135 a flareup onthe West Flank Fireline ran approximately 120 feet upthe slope tothe topof the Main Ridge ina narrow, about 5 foot wide, run (South Canyon Report). This run prompted discussion to pull outof the West Flank fireline and ignited a spot fire that the firefighters onthe Main Ridge worked to extinguish. Bucket drops of water from the helicopter cooled the flareup, and work onthe fireline resumed. In response toa flareup ina tree located south Figure 19—Fire perimeters through morning of July 6, 1994 (adapted from original Accident Investigation Report). The 0930 perimeter is adapted from Mackey’smap drawn during morning recon flight. The July 4and July 5 perimeters are based on video interpretation bythe Investigation Team using Bell’s video (Bell 1994).
ofthe Spur Ridge at about 1300, smokejumpers working near the Spur Ridge retreated 480 feet back along the fireline toa point near the Tree (South Canyon Report; Petrilli 1996). A water drop from the helicopter cooled the flareup, and the firefighters returned tothe area where the fireline crossed the Spur Ridge. Smokejumper Rhoades cut down the tree that became the Stump reference point, and the firefighters resumed building the fireline. Between 1230 and 1300, the helicopter ferried 10of the Prineville Hotshots, including Hotshot Superintendent Shepard, from Canyon Creek Estates toH-2. Around 1330 nine ofthe hotshots, ledby Squad Leader Kelso, were assigned to reinforce the smokejumpers constructing the West Flank Fireline. Shepard remained onthe Main Ridge. The remaining 10 Prineville Hotshots remained atthe helibase at Canyon Creek Estates. They noted an overcast sky and gusty winds around 1400. Between 1400 and 1430 Hotshot Foreman Scholz radioed Shepard three times to report gusty, erratic winds atthe helibase and increased smoke lowon the fire’s west side. During oneof the calls, Shepard responded that winds had increased onthe Main Ridge. Figure 20—Photograph taken from the interstate highway looking northeast toward west-facing side of Main Ridge. Photograph was taken bythe Prineville Hotshot Superintendent as they were traveling tothe fire late onthe morning of July 6, 1994. Smoke behind light post on left is near West Flank Fireline. Smoke behind light post on right is near the Double-Draws. Courtesy ofT. Shepard
smokejumpers working onthe West Flank Fireline stopped for lunch ona small knoll midway upthe Lunch Spot Ridge (thus the name Lunch Spot). Jumpers Thrash and Roth remained onthe West Flank Fireline. At approxi- mately 1445 Smokejumper Longanecker left to scout an area south ofthe Lunch Spot Ridge. He hiked southwest from the Lunch Spot into the Double Draws (South Canyon Report). At about 1510 Longanecker requested by radio that some smokejumpers come down and start building line around a hotspot that had flared up (South Canyon Report). The smokejumpers stated that they felt some concern about building new line when the fire was still active along the newly completed West Flank Fireline tothe north. Afew ofthe smokejumpers moved a short distance south and east into the northeast side ofthe Double Draws (see Petrilli Photo Point and Longanecker position infig. 8). Longanecker requested and received a water drop onthe hotspot. Witness statements indicate that asthe winds increased sodid the fire activity inthe underburned pinyon-juniper south ofthe Lunch Spot Ridge and along the Main Ridge (South Canyon Report). Main Ridge—Around 1515 the helicopter ferried the remaining 10 Prineville Hotshots from Canyon Creek Estates toH-2. They were assigned to widen the fireline onthe Main Ridge between H-2and the Zero Point. West winds between H-2and the top ofthe West Flank Fireline were strong enough that when the firefighters working onthe Main Ridge tossed brush into the air, the wind carried it over the east side ofthe ridge (South Canyon Report). In contrast, about 300 feet away, some ofthe group stopped fora break near the Zero Point and noted that the winds were light, estimated tobe less than 5 miles per hour (South Canyon Report). Fire activity inthe underburned oakon the west side ofthe Main Ridge consisted oflow intensity flaming and smoldering inthe leaves and debris onthe ground under the oak canopy with some torching of individual trees. July 6, 1530 to 1600—Double Draw Crown Fire Runs and Spot Fire on Main Ridge West Flank Fireline—At about 1530 Smokejumper Mackey commented onthe erratic winds. He sent Smokejumpers Erickson and Doehring to patrol the West Flank Fireline for rolling material and hotspots. The winds were increasing in speed (South Canyon Report). Mackey called the hotshots who were working near the Lunch Spot and told them to hold the line and improve the cup trench onthe West Flank Fireline. Main Ridge—Hotshot Scholz left the Main Ridge and started down the West Flank Fireline carrying two5 gallon containers of water (time, 1530). He noted that while winds were strong and gusty onthe Main Ridge, they were relatively calm onthe West Flank Fireline (Scholz 1995). West Flank Fireline—Jumper Hipke had left the Lunch Spot to work onthe West Flank Fireline. The Prineville Hotshots and Smokejumpers Hipke, Thrash, Erickson, and Doehring were all working north ofthe point where the fireline drops off the Lunch Spot Ridge. We estimate that this group was spread along the fireline, approximately 1,450to 1,880 feet down the fireline from the Zero Point (time, 1530).
the Stump. Scholz helped Roth move alog off the line (about 1539). They talked, and then afew minutes later, Scholz headed back upthe fireline toward the Main Ridge leaving the water containers for Roth to carry tothe firefighters working farther southwest along the fireline (time, 1545). There was little wind, and the previously cloudy sky was clearing (Scholz 1995). Erickson and Doehring hiked north along the fireline looking for hotspots. They met Roth atthe Stump (approximately 1555). Double Draws—After the helicopter dropped water ona flareup inthe Double Draws, Smokejumpers Petrilli, Thomas, and Shelton contoured southeast along the slope from the Lunch Spot (approximately 1545). Another five smokejumpers were scattered between the Lunch Spot and Petrilli, who stopped about 630 feet south and east ofthe Lunch Spot. Afew minutes later Longanecker asked the incoming helicopter to drop another bucket of water onthe flareup. At this time a flareup that had occurred onthe Main Ridge fireline about 200 feet south ofthe Zero Point was spotting across the fireline. Itwas agreed that the next bucket of water should goto the Main Ridge (South Canyon Report; OSHA 1995). Several ofthe smokejumpers had gathered near what we have designated the Petrilli Photo Point (fig. 21). From this location they could look southwest Figure 21—Topographical map with crown fire runs in Double Draws identified by heavy red lines (time, 1555). Vectors show general wind flow over fire area.
While the smokejumpers were atthe Petrilli Photo Point, individual trees began to torch, anda narrow crown fire started burning upthe slope located directly south across the Double Draws from them. This fire burned through the previously underburned Douglas-fir, pinyon, and juniper with estimated flame heights greater than 100 feet (about 1555). The smokejumpers stopped moving downhill (South Canyon Report). Three separate runs occurred in rapid succession (Petrilli 1996). Petrilli indicated that heand the others with him were surprised atthe speed of these runs. Petrilli photographed this fire activity from his position (fig. 22). The photograph shows the crown fire run and smoke over the entire area. Main Ridge—When Scholz reached the Main Ridge, after leaving Roth, he noted that winds were strong, approximately 45 miles per hour (time, 1553). The sky was clear over the fire, but clouds were located over Storm King Mountain. Fire spotted across the Main Ridge Fireline at about 1554 (fig. 23a). When Helicopter Pilot Good attempted to drop water onthe spot fire burning onthe Main Ridge (around 1555), the winds caused the water drop to miss the fire (fig. 23b). The pilot later estimated the winds were blowing 35 miles per hour. Asthe pilot flew back to refill the water bucket he noticed fire activity increasing throughout the area (as demonstrated by Figure 22—Photograph of smoke in West Drainage near Double Draws at approximately 1555. Perspective is looking southwest from Petrilli Photo Point. Smokejumper Longanecker is identified. Note flames from crown fires burning in conifers south ofthe Double Draws. Courtesy ofT. Petrilli
Figure 23—(A) Photograph of spot fire burning onthe Main Ridge south ofthe Zero Point at approximately 1553. Perspective is looking south from knob north ofH-2. (B) Photograph of helicopter dropping first bucket of water on spot fire near Main Ridge at approximately 1555. Perspective is looking south from knob north ofH-2. Note smoke on right side of picture over Double Draws, and winds blowing smoke and water tothe left (east). Courtesy ofT. Shepard Courtesy ofT. Shepard
east-facing slope across the West Drainage north ofthe Lunch Spot Ridge. We believe that the spot fires seen by Good were near the bottom ofthe West Drainage west ofthe West Bench (fig. 24). Hearing firefighters over the radio talking about spot fires, Good did not report those hehad seen (Good 1996). July 6, 1600 to 1603—Fire Crosses West Drainage Main Ridge—Short duration torching and runs through the vegetation canopy were occurring inside the fire perimeter. The BLM/U.S. Forest Service firefighter crew onthe Main Ridge had been working to extinguish the spot fire located about 200 feet south along the Main Ridge from the Zero Point. The spot fire continued to burn onthe east side ofthe Main Ridge Fireline (1600). The wind was strong enough that it blew Crewmember Byers hardhat off (South Canyon Report). Scholz called the Prineville crew mem- bers working onthe Main Ridge Fireline near H-2to move up (south) to help the BLM/U.S. Forest Service crew working onthe spot fire. Double Draws—Afew minutes after the crown fire runs south ofthe Double Draws, Petrilli saw smoke coming from the bottom ofthe West Drainage (1602). Fire was starting to burn north upthe east-facing slope across the drainage from him (South Canyon Report; Petrilli 1996). Petrilli radioed Mackey about the fire across the drainage. Then heand the smokejumpers with him started back toward the Lunch Spot. The fire inthe West Drainage quickly developed into a running flaming front 50 yards wide burning diagonally upthe east-facing slope andup the West Drainage (South Canyon Report) (fig. 24). Petrilli estimated that winds athis location were blowing 35 miles per hour (time 1603). Longanecker heard a call for retardant (he thought it came from Mackey). The person making the call stated, “We have a real bad situation here” (South Canyon Report). Longanecker began moving toward the Lunch Spot, which hehad identified asa safe area. July 6, 1603 to 1609—Fire Moves Up West Drainage West Drainage—The winds blowing upthe bottom ofthe West Drainage pushed the fire quickly through the fine fuels into the Bowl (about 350 feet north from the base ofthe Double Draws). Postfire inspection suggests that the Bowl contained a heavier concentration of vegetation than onthe surrounding slopes. Asthe fire burned into the cured grasses, small shrubs, and standing live and dead trees inthe bowl, the size and height ofthe smoke column over the fire increased. Lunch Spot—The smokejumpers, who had been observing the fire inthe Double Draws, continued back tothe Lunch Spot (about 5 minutes walking time). The fire onthe east-facing slope across from them ran 770 feet tothe topof the ridge and continued to burn north along the slope. Smokejumper Petrilli estimated the upslope winds athis location were blowing about 45 miles per hour (Petrilli 1995). West Flank Fireline—Smokejumper Hipke, who had been working ona hotspot about 100 feet north along the West Flank Fireline from the Lunch Spot, moved farther north around the hotshots in front ofhim and continued upthe fireline (generally toward the northeast). Hemet Smokejumper
Thrash at about 1603. Within a minute, Thrash and Hipke were joined by Smokejumper Roth, who had come down the line carrying the two water containers Hotshot Scholz had left with him. About 1604, Smokejumpers Hipke, Roth, and Thrash, and Hotshot Hagen, who was nearby, noticed the smoke column building over the West Drainage. After a short discussion the four of them started hiking northeast upthe West Flank Fireline toward the Main Ridge. It appeared to them that the area around the Double Draws and Lunch Spot would be overrun first, so moving north upthe West Flank Fireline was the only alternative (Hipke 1995). Atthe same time, Hotshot Kelso, who was working onthe West Flank Fireline between Thrash and the Lunch Spot, radioed Shepard to inform him that “a spot fire [had] crossed the draw [West Drainage] below them” (South Canyon Report). Shepard told them “toget outof there” andgo tothe designated safety zone atH-1 (Scholz 1995; South Canyon Report). Kelso and the other hotshots working onthe fireline were also moving northeast upthe fireline bythe time the three smokejumpers and Hagen started out the fireline (about 1605). Figure 24—Topographical map showing fire south of Double Draws and starting to burn across the bottom ofthe West Drainage and toward the Bowl (approximate time, 1602). Red dots in West Drainage indicate approximate locations of inactive spot fires based on helicopter pilot Goods statements.
incoming helicopter, the strong winds, and Kelso’s call, Scholz commented, “Things are getting complicated.” Shepard and Blanco told the Main Ridge Group togo toH-1 (South Canyon Report; OSHA 1995). Hotshot Gray noted the time onhis watch as 1604 and commented, “Remember this time” (South Canyon Report; Scholz 1995). Scholz told his group to wait for the incoming bucket drop (Scholz 1995). Many spot fires had developed onthe Main Ridge. The firefighters who had been working onthe Main Ridge abandoned their efforts to control them (Scholz 1995). Helicopter Pilot Good estimates hewas flying through westerly winds of45 to50 miles per hour onhis return with the second bucket of water for the Main Ridge spot fire. Dueto strong westerly winds, hehad to circle around and approach the Main Ridge from the east. This time hehit the spot fire with the water drop (about 1605). The water cooled the spot fire sufficiently (fig. 25) for the firefighters to pass through itand move south, uphill toward H-1. As Good finished the water drop and started back to refill the bucket, he noted the large smoke column building over the Bowl. The smoke was blowing directly over his position above the Main Ridge. Hewas not able to Figure 25—Photograph taken shortly after the second water drop on Main Ridge at approximately 1601. Perspective is same asin figures 23a and b, looking south from topof knob north ofH-2. Note column developing over West Drainage and significantly more smoke over west flank of fire than shown in photograph taken from same point approximately 10 minutes earlier. Courtesy ofT. Shepard
change inthe situation, he headed tothe helibase atthe Canyon Creek Estates subdivision to disconnect the bucket sohe could return to ferry firefighters off the ridge (Good 1996). Lunch Spot—Mackey and the other smokejumpers who had been with Petrilli meton the Lunch Spot Ridge about 100 feet below the Lunch Spot. The smokejumpers were moving toward the Lunch Spot. Mackey told them there wasa good “black” area farther upthe Lunch Spot ridge andto go there. Asthe smokejumpers continued upthe ridge, Mackey called to check on Longanecker’s position. Longanecker replied, “We’rein a safe zone” (1606) (South Canyon Report). After leaving the eight smokejumpers, Mackey continued across West Flank behind the hotshots and smokejumpers who were hiking upthe West Flank Fireline tothe Main Ridge. West Flank Fireline—As Smokejumpers Hipke, Roth, and Thrash neared the Stump, Hipke looked back tothe southwest and saw fire burning inthe bottom andup both sides ofthe West Drainage, the fire front was advancing north and was forming a “U” shape inthe bottom ofthe West Drainage (fig. 26) (Hipke 1994). The Tree—Jumpers Doehring and Erickson met Smokejumper Archuleta near the Draw (450 feet below and west ofthe Zero Point). Archuleta had walked down the fireline from the Main Ridge. They moved upthe fireline tothe Tree located 200 feet below the Zero Point where BLM Firefighters Brixey and Haugh were working with a chain saw (1606). Brixey and Haugh shut off their saw. The three smokejumpers pointed out the smoke column over the West Drainage and relayed the message to move tothe safety zone. Following a short discussion Archuleta, Doehring, and Brixey headed upthe fireline toward the Main Ridge (1608). Erickson and Haugh remained atthe Tree (South Canyon Report). July 6, 1609 to 1610—Fire on West Flank Smokejumper Mackey caught the firefighters hiking upthe West Flank Fireline as they passed the Stump (about 1609). Using known values for walking speeds in rough terrain and distances along the fireline, we estimate that Mackey must have runto catch the last ofthe hotshots at this location. By this time the smokejumpers and hotshots were hiking in essentially one group, hereafter referred toas the West Flank Fireline Group. The group continued to follow the West Flank Fireline. They hiked over the Spur Ridge and then east upthe fireline toward the Main Ridge. West Flank Fireline—The fire moved onto the West Bench. It rapidly increased in size, burning across a wide front. Itwas spreading north upthe West Drainage and upslope ona path parallel tothe Lunch Spot Ridge (approximately 1608). As Smokejumper Hipke reached the top ofthe Spur Ridge he looked back and saw Mackey atthe rear ofthe group (approximately 1609) (Hipke 1995). Behind Mackey the fire burned ina wide front above and below the West Flank Fireline (fig. 27). Hipke states that dueto the height ofthe Gambel oak and the drainage topography, the firefighters had only brief glimpses ofthe fire burning behind and below them.
The Tree—Firefighters Haugh and Erickson atthe Tree could hear a loud roaring sound from the fire. They saw the first few smokejumpers inthe group cresting the Spur Ridge and walking northeast along the West Flank Fireline toward them. They saw fire burning behind and below the West Flank Fireline Group. Erickson called Mackey and told him about the fire, Mackey did not respond (time, about 1610). Main Ridge—The firefighters hiking along the Main Ridge neared the rocky outcropping north ofH-1. They saw fire nearly all the wayup the slope below andto the west of them (estimated time 1609). Several firefighters near the front ofthe group felt they could not make itto the safety zone atH-1 before the fire reached the top ofthe ridge. This was the same fire run Hipke saw from the Spur Ridge. The terrain was steep, the firefighters were fatigued, and spot fires onthe Main Ridge between them andH-1 were actively burning (South Canyon Report; OSHA 1995). Hotshot Scholz told the Prineville firefighters to “Reverse and move”—meaning to return the Figure 26—Fire perimeter at 1607 as Smokejumper Hipke looked down canyon (southwest) from the Stump. Fire was burning on both sides ofthe West Drainage and below the West Flank Fireline.
way they had come (Scholz 1995). BLM Squad Boss Ryerson also told her crew togo toH-2. Both crews turned back and began walking and running north down the Main Ridge toward H-2. Hotshot Crewmember Navarro, intending to maintain his place near the end ofthe line, let others pass him. Ashe was looking south toward H-1he saw Hotshots Valentine and Robertson. It appeared asif“they came running right outof the fire” (South Canyon Report; OSHA 1995). The two firefighters ran through fire, butit consisted of scattered, relatively short flames along the Main Ridge Fireline. The fires burning along the top ofthe Main Ridge behind (south of) the firefighters were several times taller than a person and burning on both sides ofthe Main Ridge Fireline. These larger flames were caused bythe main fire cresting the ridge between the Rocks andH-1. Figure 27—Fire perimeter at 1609 as Smokejumper Hipke looked south from point where fireline crested the Spur Ridge. The fire had crossed the southern portion ofthe West Flank Fireline. Itwas burning upthe West Flank Fireline, north upthe West Bench, and east tothe Main Ridge. Hipke estimates that at this time the fire burning east upthe slope was about two-thirds ofthe distance upthe slope below H-1.
Main Ridge—AsBLM Firefighter Brixey and Smokejumpers Doehring and Archuleta, who were hiking upthe fireline from the Tree, neared the Zero Point, the first members ofthe Main Ridge Group passed them, heading toward H-2. Joining the Main Ridge Group, Archuleta, Doehring, and Brixey continued about 110 feet north along the Main Ridge. At this point Archuleta and Doehring moved west about 10 feet off the Main Ridge toa location where they could see southwest diagonally down the slope toward the fireline and lower part ofthe Spur Ridge. We have designated this location the Photo Point (fig. 6and 7). West Flank Fireline—The West Flank Fireline group was approaching the Draw. Hipke stated that Thrash stepped offto the left ofthe fireline and said, “Shelter?” almost asa question and Roth stepped offto the right (estimated time 1610) (Hipke 1996). Hipke stepped past Thrash and Roth and continued a fast hike upthe line. Figure 28—Fire perimeter at 1610. The fire continued to spread upthe West Drainage and east tothe Main Ridge. Fire has reached topof Main Ridge near the Rocks. Smokejumper Erickson called Smokejumper Mackey to inform himof spot fire on north endof West Bench.
shouting and waving atthe West Flank Group to hurry. Erickson sawa spot fire onthe West Bench. Later, Erickson identified the location ofthe spot fire tobe about 1,000 feet in distance down the slope below the Tree and 190 feet above the bottom ofthe West Drainage (fig. 28). Erickson called to inform Mackey ofthe spot fire (South Canyon Report). Erickson stated, “The spot moved fast [north upthe canyon]. Idid not feel a perceptible change in winds. I could tell that they [the West Flank Fireline Group] were moving as fast as they could. At that time the lead guy and the group were 75 yards away. We were yelling at them togo faster. They looked tired and were not going fast. Thrash wasin the lead and Mackey was second to last. They were ina close group.” Erickson asked Haugh to pull out his camera. As Erickson looked through the viewfinder (about 1611) hesaw the last three firefighters inthe group with fire everywhere behind them (South Canyon Report). Because Erickson’s camera wasat the end ofthe roll of film, this attempted photo- graph hadno film on which tobe exposed. Main Ridge—Archuleta and Doehring took four photographs from the Photo Point onthe Main Ridge (fig. 29a-d). Their photos show the last three members ofthe West Flank Fireline Group coming over the top ofthe Spur Ridge (estimated time 1611). After taking the photographs, Doehring joined the firefighters heading north along the Main Ridge toward H-2. Archuleta and Doehring’s photographs show the fire burning upslope toward the Main Ridge immediately south ofthe Spur Ridge. Itwas later determined that these photographs were taken at essentially the same time, angle, and view that Erickson tried to photograph (Erickson 1996). From near H-2 Blanco called for air support from Grand Junction. West Flank Fireline—Approximately 100 feet beyond the point at which hehad stepped past Roth and Thrash, Hipke looked back and saw the group following 20to 30 feet behind him with Roth inthe lead (1611). Ahead, through the brush, he could see Haugh and Erickson atthe Tree waving for them to keep coming. The Tree—Immediately after Erickson attempted to take the photo he turned to follow Haugh. Haugh had gone upthe fireline toward the Main Ridge and was no longer in view. Erickson looked back over his right shoulder and saw a wall of fire coming upthe hill below the fireline (South Canyon Report). Our analysis indicates that this fire was burning upslope onthe south side ofthe Spur Ridge. Erickson did not see Hipke who was climbing the fireline below him. Witness statements and the photos taken by Archuleta and Doehring indicate that fire extended from the West Bench 800to 900 feet northwest ofand below the Tree, then south around the base ofthe Spur Ridge 400 feet southwest ofthe firefighters, andup the south side ofthe Spur Ridge tothe topof the Main Ridge (South Canyon Report). Figures 28and 30 show the approximate position ofthe fire front. July 6, 1611 to 1614—Firefighters on West Flank Fireline Overrun Main Ridge—As they retreated north along the ridge, the Main Ridge Group passed through active spot fires burning along the Main Ridge Fireline. Several ofthe firefighters later stated that fire was burning on both sides ofthe ridge (South Canyon Report). Some indication ofthe severity of
Figure 29—Photographs taken at 1611 from Archuleta/Doehring Photo Point looking down (southwest) toward fireline and fire burning behind the Spur Ridge. The four photographs are arranged in chronological sequence. Courtesy ofS. Archuleta Courtesy ofS. Archuleta
Courtesy ofS. Doehring Courtesy ofS. Doehring
the situation is indicated bythe fact that they abandoned the chainsaw fuel containers on both sides ofthe trail. The main fire was producing a loud roar (South Canyon Report). Hotshot Scholz said that they felt that the fire was moving north ata pace equal to theirs (Scholz 1995). As they passed the Zero Point, the air contained burning embers and smoke. Hotshot Navarro, who was near the back ofthe group, said that when he neared the Zero Point, “The fire was only onmy left or west” (South Canyon Report). At this time, Scholz and some ofthe other firefighters dropped off the east side ofthe Main Ridge and followed a trail that contoured along the side ofthe ridge toward H-2. Some firefighters recall hearing chainsaw fuel containers exploding behind them. After leaving the Photo Point, Archuleta moved south toward the Zero Point to make sure that none ofthe firefighters inthe Main Ridge Group turned down the West Flank Fireline. Asthe last ofthe Main Ridge Group firefighters passed him heading toward H-2, Archuleta also started toward Figure 30—Fire perimeter at 1612. Fire is400 ft south and 450 ft southwest of firefighters on West Flank Fireline. Main Fire has merged with spot fire andis burning up slope north of fireline. Concave shaped fire front begins to form around top (northeast) section of West Flank Fireline.
Point, Scholz looked back tothe south along the ridge and saw the fire curling over the Main Ridge behind a firefighter running down the trail toward him (Scholz 1995). The fire burning upthe slope behind the Spur Ridge had crested the Main Ridge 200 feet south ofthe Zero Point. Main Ridge Near H-2—Robertson, Archuleta, and Ryerson remained onthe Main Ridge. Ryerson, who was ahead of Archuleta and Robertson, stated that asshe neared H-2 there was heat, intense smoke, and sparks every- where, and the fire was close onthe west side (South Canyon Report ; Good 1996; OSHA 1995). As they moved along the Main Ridge toward H-2, Robertson and Archuleta could feel heat behind andto their left. The remaining chainsaws and fuel containers were abandoned north ofH-2. The firefighters were told togo down into the East Drainage. Zero Point—Shortly after the last ofthe Main Ridge Group passed the Zero Point, BLM Firefighter Haugh, reached the top ofthe West Flank Fireline and continued a short distance over the ridge into the East Drainage. The heat was intense enough that Haugh received some first-degree burns (Husari 1996). Smokejumper Erickson, who followed shortly behind Haugh, received second-degree burns tohis upper back, neck, and elbows (Hospital Report 1994). West Flank Fireline—Based onour reconstruction of crew and fire movement and interviews with witnesses, we estimate that Jumpers Thrash and Roth stopped near the Tree about the time Haugh and then Erickson reached the Zero Point. The rest ofthe West Flank Fireline group following ina line behind them stopped. We estimate that after a short hesitation, Hotshot Blecha stepped around the group, and continued upthe hill. Our timeline places Hipke about 45 seconds behind Erickson. We estimate that Blecha followed about 40 seconds (100 feet) behind Hipke. H-2and the East Drainage—Helicopter Pilot Good returned and hov- ered about 100 feet above and northeast ofH-2 (between 1612 and 1613). He estimated his return time after dropping the water bucket atthe subdivision tobe 5to 7 minutes (Good 1996; Hopf 1996; South Canyon Report). The pilot saw people running north along the Main Ridge and then moving off the ridge from a point south ofH-2 down into the East Drainage. The pilot was unable to make radio contact with anyof the firefighters. Winds were from the west and blowing harder than when the pilot had made the previous water drop onthe Main Ridge. Grit and debris were blowing through the open cockpit doors. He could see fire burning along the top ofthe Main Ridge from H-1to the intersection ofthe Spur Ridge and the Main Ridge. Flames were 150to 200 feet high. Fire was burning 100to 200 feet below (west) H-2. Fire had progressed north upthe West Drainage and was spreading east toward the Saddle (Good 1996; OSHA 1995). Asthe first members ofthe Main Ridge Group began descending into the East Drainage, Shepard, Blanco, and Helitack Crewmembers Tyler and Browning moved some red packs that had been left north ofH-2to a small depression nearer the helispot (approximately 1613). Shepard estimated that they only looked down for20 seconds but were surprised when they looked up from moving the packs to find that the fire was nearly toH-2 (Shepard 1995). Smoke and burning embers were flying into the area and fusees with the gear atH-2 were igniting (Shepard 1995).
estimate ofthe fire location between 1612 and 1613 is shown in figures 30and 31. Fire was burning upcanyon and upslope asa continuous front that stretched from the Rocks tothe junction ofthe Main Ridge and the Spur Ridge then down the Spur Ridge across the north endof the bench and partially upthe slope toward the Photo Point andH-2. The fire burned quickly upthe hill. Prineville Hotshot Scott Blecha died 120 feet from the top ofthe fireline. Prineville Hotshot Crewmembers Kathi Beck, Tami Bickett, Levi Brinkley, Doug Dunbar, Terri Hagen, Bonnie Holtby, Rob Johnson, and Jon Kelso; and Smokejumpers Don Mackey, Roger Roth, and James Thrash were entrapped and died 200to 280 feet below the Zero Point. While Hipke hiked upthe last section ofthe fireline he felt his arms and neck getting hot. He dropped his pulaski, which was later found 82 feet below the Zero Point, and tried to remove his fire shelter touse asa shield. Hot air and embers blew past him. He could feel his ears getting burned andit Figure 31—Fire perimeter at 1613. Fire is burning on three sides ofthe last section ofthe West Flank Fireline.
Figure 32—Estimated fire position at 1614. Fire had reached Main Ridge from H-1to Zero Point and was approaching H-2. Some firefighters were entering the East Drainage. provided some protection tothe back ofhis neck while he used his hands to shield his ears and face from the increasingly unbearable heat. Hehad difficulty getting the shelter outof its wrapper and dropped it15 feet from the Zero Point when he tried to leap forward to escape the heat. Ashe jumped forward, hot air hit him forcibly from behind andhe fell forward tothe ground, yelling ashe fell and catching his fall with his hands (estimated time 1614). After falling forward, he jumped back upand hiked across the top ofthe ridge, shielding his face and ears from the heat with his hands. Hipke, though burned on both sides, did not recall seeing fire ashe hiked over the top ofthe Main Ridge. Figure 32 shows the location ofthe fire at this time. The shoulder straps on Hipke’s backpack had melted or fallen off, leaving the pack hanging byits belt strap and bumping against the backs ofhis thighs (Hipke 1994). Reaching the east edge ofthe Main Ridge he unsnapped the backpack belt strap, left the pack, and ran down the steep slope into the East Drainage. Hipke suffered third-degree burns over 10 percent ofhis body
der, face, and back ofhis head. He received lesser burns onhis left side (Hospital Report 1994). Afew hundred feet down the slope Hipke met Haugh and Erickson who wrapped the burned portion ofhis arms and hands inaT- shirt and poured water over the makeshift bandage. Together they moved down the East Drainage. They were the first firefighters to reach the Interstate highway (Hipke 1995). July 6, 1614 to 1623—Helitack Firefighters Overrun Asthe fire approached H-2, Helitack Crewmembers Browning and Tyler headed toward the smokejumper Drop Zone located about 1,000 feet tothe northeast (South Canyon Report). The helicopter pilot tried to make radio contact with the two helitack crewmembers; he could not see them and they did not respond tohis radio calls. The high winds, air turbulence, smoke, and the approaching fire forced the helicopter to leave the area. Firefighters entering the East Drainage radioed and yelled for the two helitack crewmen to follow them down the drainage (OSHA 1995). Tyler and Browning replied that they needed togo upthe hill—to “run the ridge” (OSHA 1995). Itis not clear where the two firefighters were headed. Perhaps they felt the East Drainage tobe unsafe, or they expected tobe picked upby the helicopter that was flying over H-2at this time. Fire quickly engulfed the entire Main Ridge from the Rocks near H-1to the smokejumper Drop Zone. A portion ofthe fire ran northeast across the saddle between H-2and the Drop Zone, cutting the two helitack crewmen off from the East Drainage (fig. 33). This fire caused the firefighters below H-2to turn andgo straight down the East Drainage rather than follow a contour route toward the northeast (South Canyon Report; OSHA 1995). The helitack crewmembers were forced bythe fire togo northwest from the Drop Zone toward a bare rocky outcropping. As they neared the rocky face, they encountered a50 feet deep gulley. Evidence gathered during the postfire inspection suggests that after entering the gully, they set their gear down and moved about 30 feet down the gully where they attempted to deploy their fire shelters. Based ona reenactment ofthe travel time between the red bags near H-2and the helitack fatality site, we estimate that the two firefighters reached the gulley and attempted to deploy their shelters between 1622 and 1623 (fig. 34). The postfire evidence suggests that the two firefighters, Robert Browning and Richard Tyler, were incapacitated and died when they were engulfed inhot air and smoke before they could fully deploy and enter their fire shelters. East Drainage—Blanco, Shepard, and Scholz followed the Main Ridge Group down the East Drainage (approximately 1614 to 1615). They arrived atthe Interstate between 1715 and 1730 (Scholz 1995). July 6, 1622 to 1830—Smokejumpers Deploy in Shelters on Lunch Spot Ridge Lunch Spot Ridge—The eight smokejumpers hiking upthe Lunch Spot Ridge reached their shelter deployment site at approximately 1619. They deployed intwo groups, six nearest H-1and twoa short distance farther down the ridge. The deployment area had burned in previous days and was a short distance (235to 430 feet) below the junction ofthe Main Ridge and Lunch Spot Ridge (H-1). Smokejumper Petrilli called Mackey over the radio about
1619 but did not receive a response. Petrilli checked his watch as they entered their shelters; the time was 1624. Over the next 45 minutes the eight smokejumpers felt heat from three separate fire runs that occurred about 500 feet south of them (Petrilli 1996). Following Blanco’s call for support, airtankers were dispatched tothe fire from Grand Junction. They were off the ground around 1630 and were over the fire within 20 minutes. High winds and heavy smoke prevented the planes from getting near the fire. Photos and video (Bell 1994) taken from the heliport atthe Canyon Creek Estates subdivision at about this time show a large smoke column building over the entire West Flank (fig. 35). The pilots spotted the shelters ofthe eight firefighters who deployed onthe Lunch Spot Ridge below H-1and dropped retardant around the deployment site (fig. 36). Smoke totally obscured the slopes north ofthe Lunch Spot Ridge. Because the smoke and high winds showed no signs of quickly abating, the airtankers were released (South Canyon Report). Figure 33—Fire perimeter at 1618. Fire is burning along the Main Ridge from H-1to the Smokejumper Drop Zone. Itis also burning northeast across the saddle, cutting Helitack Crew- members Tyler and Browning off from East Drainage (1618).
Longanecker, who had hiked upthe Lunch Spot Ridge, joined the eight smokejumpers near the top ofthe Lunch Spot Ridge as they emerged from their shelters (1800 to 1830). The fire had almost totally consumed the Gambel oakon the entire west-facing slope ofthe Main Ridge, leaving scattered, burned stobs. The area was cool enough to cross on foot, and the smokejumpers began looking for the other firefighters. Seeing objects that looked outof place with the surroundings near the top ofthe West Flank Fireline, some ofthe smokejumpers walked over tothe area. There they found 12 firefighters who had died inthe fire. After notifying the authorities ofthe fatalities, the nine smokejumpers hiked toH-2to wait for the helicopter to ferry them off the mountain. Figure 34—Fire perimeters from blowup (1602) to 1623.
Figure 35—Photograph taken from Canyon Creek housing subdivision look- ing east at smoke column. Note that the smoke columns show both the upcanyon winds above the West Drainage and the west winds blowing across the ridges. Figure 36—Photograph taken from Canyon Creek Subdivision looking east at tanker plane dumping fire retardant near eight smokejumpers deployed on upper portion ofthe Lunch Spot Ridge. Courtesy ofW. Williams Courtesy ofC. Johnson
Archuleta, who had hiked out the East Drainage, joined 28 smokejumpers atthe helibase at Canyon Creek Estates (directly west ofthe fire site). About 25of the smokejumpers were ferried by helicopter tothe Main Ridge to continue search and rescue operations. Onthe return trips, the helicopter ferried the smokejumpers who had sheltered onthe Lunch Spot Ridge back tothe helibase. Those searching for the two missing helitack crewmembers walked out the West Drainage after dark. The bodies ofthe two helitack crewmen were found on July 8, 1994. The fire continued to spread eastward toward Glenwood Springs covering approximately 2,000 acres by nightfall. Maps ofthe fire perimeter made on July 10 indicate that the fire had burned about 2,115 acres (fig. 37). The fire was declared controlled on July 11, 1994. Figure 37—South Canyon Fire Day Shift Fire Map for July 10, 1994. This map shows the approximate final fire perimeter and fire size of2,115 acres.
The chronology presented inthe previous section describes firefighter locations, movement, and actions. The scenario presented inthe chronology and the fire behavior analysis presented in this section represents our best estimate ofthe sequence of events given the available information. This study would be incomplete without an analysis ofthe physical factors that caused the change from a relatively low-intensity, slow-moving fire, backing downslope inthe leaves and sticks onthe ground, toa high-intensity, fast-moving fire, burning through the entire vegetation complex. Inthe following discussion we attempt to identify the most significant factors leading tothe dramatic transition in fire behavior. We concentrate ontwo events: the blowup or transition from surface fire toa fire burning through the shrub canopy, and the fire behavior inthe area identified asthe West Flank that resulted inthe entrapment and deaths of14 firefighters. We identify three major factors that contributed tothe blowup onthe afternoon of July 6, 1994. The first factor was the presence of fire inthe bottom ofa steep narrow canyon. Second, strong upcanyon winds pushing the fire upthe canyon. Third, the fire moving into the green (not previously underburned) Gambel oak canopy. Fire in South Endof West Drainage The presence of fire inthe West Drainage atthe base ofthe Double Draws is important tothe later fire behavior because it places fire atthe bottom ofa steep narrow canyon. After the original investigation report was published, various theories continued to circulate regarding the source ofthe fire inthe West Drainage. These theories ranged from burning logs rolling down the slope to possible arson. The available evidence most strongly suggests that this fire originated from oneor both ofthe following sources: (1) fire spreading downslope through the previous night and morning of July 6and (2) fire brands lofted into the drainage from the crown fire runs that occurred south ofthe Double Draws. We discuss both. Witnesses report that the fire remained active through the night of July 5. Onthe July 6 morning reconnaissance flight, smoke was visible lowin the West Drainage. This condition continued through the day (Good 1996). On July 2 through 6, fire burned downslope inthe surface litter beneath both Gambel oak and pinyon-juniper. The total burned area approximately doubled each day. This rate of area growth is consistent with an approxi- mately constant rate of fire spread. By midmorning on July 6the fire had burned into the Double Draws and was approximately 75 percent ofthe way down the slope between H-1and the bottom ofthe West Drainage (fig. 19). Asthe relative humidity dropped and the sun heated the slopes through the day, the fire continued to spread downhill. Photographs taken atthe time ofthe crown fire reburn south ofthe Double Draws show smoke near the bottom ofthe West Drainage (fig. 22). Itis easily shown that while total burned area increased exponentially, the actual rate of spread remained remarkably constant after July 3. We evaluated fire spread through July 6by projecting the fire spread for the day based onthe fire area data from the previous days. The last measured fire perimeter before the blowup was made during the morning reconnaissance flight on July 6. Assuming continued spread atthe rate exhibited during the
Figure 38—Projected fire location on afternoon of July 6, 1994, based on fire perimeter maps from previous days. The fire spread distances were estimated measuring the distance down the slope ona line running from a point midway between the ignition point andH-1to a point inthe bottom ofthe West Drainage just tothe south ofthe Double Draws. A least squares linear approximation was then fitted tothe data after July 3; this is represented bythe heavy shaded line. All distances are increased by14 percent (assumes 55 percent slope) to account for the actual distance down the slope. The burned area data are included inthe table shown inthe figure. Dates and some critical times are also shown onthe horizontal axis to assist the reader in relating fire growth tothe chronology. West Drainage by 1600 on July 6 (fig. 38). The original accident investigators estimated a downslope fire spread rate of70 feet per hour during the night of July 5and early morning of July 6. Our calculations indicate a rate of spread of approximately 32 feet per hour. While, this analysis includes some uncertainty, it clearly supports the possibility that fire reached the bottom ofthe West Drainage by 1600 on July 6, 1994. The downhill spread, the location ofthe fire at midmorning, and the presence of smoke relatively lowin the West Drainage make it probable that the fire reached a point inor near the bottom ofthe West Drainage by early afternoon. Fire spotting occurs when burning embers are lofted into the air bythe buoyant smoke column above a flame, carried bythe wind, and then redistributed onthe ground causing new fire starts. Short distance fire spotting occurred throughout the day on July 6, 1994, as individual trees
West Drainage, itis probable that a shear layer formed where the upcanyon (southerly) flow met the westerly flow blowing over the ridges (fig. 16and 39). Smoldering and burning embers lofted into this turbulent air mass bythe crown fire south ofthe Double Draws would have been distributed generally northward along the bottom ofthe West Drainage. The original investigators reported 90to 100 percent probability of ignition based on information from area National Fire Danger Rating System Stations. Witness statements and later interviews suggest that the attention ofthe smokejumpers was focused onthe crown fire runs rather than the source of smoke farther down the slope. However, shortly after the crown fires south ofthe Double Draws, the smokejumpers saw fires starting to burn actively Figure 39—Schematic showing interaction of westerly flow over ridgetops and northerly flow up bottom of West Drainage forming a shear layer (dashed line). The turbulence generated by this shear layer enhanced the spread of burning embers upthe West Drainage and surface wind turbulence inthe area ofthe Double Draws and the West Bench. J. Kautz, U.S. Forest Service, Missoula, MT.
1996). This suggests that burning embers from the crown fires may have ignited the fire inthe bottom ofthe drainage. While itis not possible to identify with absolute certainty the exact ignition mechanism for the fire inthe bottom ofthe West Drainage, the evidence suggests that the fire resulted from oneor a combination ofthe two mech- anisms discussed above. Winds Push Fire into Bowl Relying on witness statements and fire behavior knowledge, we suspect that the area identified asthe Bowl contributed tothe blowup onthe afternoon of July 6. Postfire investigation ofthe site revealed nearly complete consumption ofthe surface fuels inthe Bowl. Scorch marks caused by increased burning onthe north side ofthe trees in this area suggest the presence of strong upcanyon (southerly) winds during the fire. We surmise that the concentration of debris onthe ground carried the fire into the crowns ofthe conifers inthe Bowl. This increased the size and height ofthe convection column over the fire. Several witnesses observed the smoke column build rapidly over the area identified asthe Bowl. We believe that strong vertical momentum associated with the fire inthe Bowl lofted embers upand onto the slopes on both sides ofthe drainage (South Canyon Report). These embers ignited spot fires. Fire Transitions to Gambel Oak Canopy General wind direction and topography caused the fire to spread upthe West Drainage. Witness statements support this. Pushed bythe winds upthe steep slopes, the fire burned past the junction ofthe Lunch Spot Ridge and West Drainage andup onto the West Bench (see fig. 4). Although the fire area was exposed to wind on July 4, 5, and6, the Gambel oak canopy did not sustain continuous fire spread, even in previously underburned areas. Asthe fire burned downslope inthe litter fuel beneath the pinyon, juniper and oak canopies, itwas generally sheltered from the wind bythe vegetation canopy. Upslope fire spread was confined to unburned islands within the fire perimeter or initiated by ladder fuel concentrations under individual trees (for example, the tree onthe West Flank Fireline that became the Stump). Significant change in fire behavior occurred only after fire burned into fine fuels atthe base of steep slopes and was exposed to strong winds. Such a transition occurred onthe west-facing slope south ofthe Double Draws where the surface fire burned into the conifer crowns spread- ing upslope in several high-intensity crown fire runs. Following the crown fire runs, the fire burned in litter and cured grass fuels along the bottom ofthe West Drainage spreading upthe steep east- and west- facing slopes andup the West Drainage past the Lunch Spot Ridge onto the south endof the West Bench. The vegetation canopy was less dense onthe east-facing slopes and along the West Bench. This exposed the surface fire tothe strong winds. The steep slopes and exposure to strong winds resulted in significant increases inthe size ofthe flames and energy release rates. This resulted in ignition ofthe pinyon-juniper canopy onthe east-facing slopes and the green Gambel oak canopy onthe West Bench. The following discussion focuses onthe physical mechanisms that resulted inthe fire spreading into and through the live fuel canopy asa continuous fire front.
fully understood. In general, fire inthe vegetation canopy follows an increase inthe amount of energy entering the canopy, ora decrease inthe amount of energy necessary to ignite the complex, or both. Increased slope, wind exposure, or decreased moisture status of live or associated dead fuels may individually, orin combination, result in such transitions. Fire spread from the surface into the vegetation canopies often occurs rapidly; however, the factors leading upto the transition may develop relatively slowly. For example, fires often burn downslope relatively slowly, but when a backing fire reaches a position where an upslope runin unburned fuels is possible, the transition from backing toa fast-moving upslope fire may happen suddenly. Another example is fire burning through an area where itis sheltered from the wind into a location where itis more exposed to wind. The increased wind exposure can lead toa sudden change in fire behavior with little orno apparent change inthe environment. In both of these examples the fire burned from one area to another resulting inan abrupt change inthe slope or wind exposure. Solar heating can also influence the tendency fora fire to spread into the vegetation canopy. Exposure tothe sun can cause a decrease in relative humidity and subsequent decreases in dead fuel moisture levels. This effect may occur both under and within the live vegetation complex. Decreased fine dead fuel moisture reduces the amount of energy needed for ignition. This drying may occur throughout the day or, asin the examples above, be caused bythe fire burning into asun- exposed aspect. When the fire reaches an area of drier fine dead fuel, the flaming zone can increase in size and intensity, again leading to sustained combustion inthe vegetation canopy. When a fire begins burning inthe vegetation canopy, the flaming zone often significantly increases in height and depth. This increase is linked tothe overall increase in total burning fuel load and decrease in bulk density (mass of fuel per unit volume). Increased fuel load leads to larger flames and energy release. Decreased bulk density often results in faster fire spread rates (Catchpole and others 1998). These two factors contribute to sustained burning inthe live vegetation. Another factor contributing to fire spread in vegetation canopies is live fuel moisture content. Inan effort to assess the impact of fuel moisture onthe blowup ofthe South Canyon Fire, we compare the conditions present onthe Battlement Creek and South Canyon Fires. A high intensity fire run occurred onthe Battlement Creek Fire on July 17, 1976. This fire was approximately 30 miles west ofthe site ofthe South Canyon Fire, both burned in similar terrain and vegetation. The live Gambel oak foliar moisture content atthe Battlement Creek Fire was 167 percent (USDI 1976). A killing frost on June 14, 1976, followed bydry weather significantly increased the quantity of fine dead fuel inthe oak canopy over historical levels. Surface winds were light and consisted of normal upslope convective flow characteristic of summertime conditions inthe area. Winds aloft were 5to 15 miles per hour from the southwest. Slopes ranged from 10 percent near the bottom to75 percent near the ridgetop. The fire burned on slopes that were generally west-facing and fully exposed to solar heating from about 1100 (USDI 1976). In contrast, the Gambel oakat the South Canyon Fire site was not frost damaged, and consequently the canopy did not contain an abnormally high amount of dead leaves and stems. However, low precipitation levels during
nonunderburned Gambel oak vegetation was sampled on July 12, 1994, attwo sites located east ofthe South Canyon Fire area. The sites were ata similar aspect and elevation tothe area identified asthe West Flank. The measured live fuel moisture contents were 125 percent. The live fuel moisture content would not have changed significantly between July 4and July 12, 1994. The West Flank was west-facing with 10to 60 percent slopes and was exposed to solar radiation from about midmorning. The South Canyon Fire site was exposed to strong winds on July 4and 5, 1994, and for some time prior toand during the blowup on July 6. Both the Battlement and the South Canyon Fires experienced similar flame sizes, energy release, and spread rates. Fire reaching the base of steep slopes was the triggering mechanism to ignition ofthe canopy atthe Battlement Creek Fire. Large quantities of dead matter inthe otherwise relatively high live moisture canopy contributed to fire spread into the canopy onthe steep slopes. Strong winds were nota contributing factor. In contrast, the transition in fire behavior on July 6, 1994, onthe South Canyon Fire canbe linked to strong winds pushing the surface fire into fuels of sufficient quantity that the green Gambel oak began burning. Sustained fire spread through the green Gambel oak canopy was supported by steep slopes, wind, and moderately low live fuel moisture. Crown fire spread continued with reportedly much reduced windspeeds onthe steep slopes ofthe West Flank Fireline. Once the canopy was ignited, the increase in energy release rates substantially contributed to continued crowning on both the Battle- ment Creek and the South Canyon Fires. Itwas only after the fire began burning inthe nonunderburned green Gambel oak that it spread into the previously underburned Gambel oak. Conclusions based on only two samples cannot be considered definitive. But this comparison suggests that sudden transitions from surface fire to fire in live vegetation canopies canbe linked toa combination of factors, including but not limited to: live and dead vegetation moisture content, the spatial distribution and quantity of live and dead components inthe canopy, exposure to wind, fire site aspect and slope, and the intensity ofan initiating fire burning within, adjacent to, or under the vegetation canopy. Not all of these factors are necessary fora surface fire to spread into the vegetation canopy. Fire on West Flank Asthe fire burned through the bottom ofthe West Drainage, up onto the Bench, andup the slopes, itwas influenced bytwo windflow patterns: the upcanyon (southerly) flow inthe bottom ofthe West Drainage and the westerly flow associated with the passing cold front. There is strong evidence inthe form of witness observations, photographs (fig. 35), and postfire meteorological modeling to support the existence of strong upcanyon winds inthe West Drainage. These winds pushed the fire upthe drainage. As fire burned along the bottom ofthe West Drainage, it spread up onto the West Bench where it began burning inthe Gambel oak canopy. Once the fire burned above the Bench, itwas increasingly exposed tothe westerly winds blowing across the north-south oriented ridges. The result was short dura- tion rapid fire runs east tothe topof the Main Ridge. The fire was essentially spreading intwo directions, one front moving northeast and one front east
firefighters moving south along the Main Ridge toward H-1to turn around atthe rocks and retreat back toward H-2. Our analysis suggests that the fire was spreading north, upthe canyon, at approximately 3 feet per second. Spread rates of7 feet per second occurred on midslope runs and northeast directed runs between Erickson’s Spot Fire andH-2. We estimate that the upslope runs from the West Bench tothe Main Ridge occurred ata rate of6 to9 feet per second (see table B-8). Although there were no eyewitnesses tothe fire event in which 12 firefighters perished onthe West Flank Fireline near the tree, the available information suggests three possible fire behavior scenarios. They are presented below. We believe the three scenarios represent the most likely events. The actual sequence of events may have included parts ofall three scenarios. We also discuss the fire behavior that resulted inthe deaths ofthe two helitack crewmembers. Finally, we address the possibility ofa fuel-air explosion. One scenario, referred toas the “U” shaped fire front, involves fire burning on three sides ofthe firefighters as they started upthe last section ofthe fireline. A second scenario, termed the surfacing smoke column, is based onthe assumption that strong westerly winds blowing across the top ofthe north-south oriented ridges pushed the column of smoke and hot gases against the slope. This simultaneously ignited the vegetation over a rela- tively wide area around the firefighters. A third scenario simply assumes that the fire onthe West Bench below the firefighters ignited a rapid upslope run. This run, assisted by westerly winds, burned quickly upthe Draw, overtaking the group of firefighters hiking upthe fireline. The fire conditions and events last observed and recorded by witnesses inthe area of West Flank Fireline are common starting points for all three scenarios. The following isa short review of those conditions and observations. At approximately 1608:30BLM Firefighter Haugh and Smokejumper Erickson were atthe Tree. They heard the fire roar asit burned into the previously underburned Gambel oak near the1,450 foot mark onthe West Flank Fireline. Haugh and Erickson then saw firefighters coming upthe fireline where it passes over the top ofthe Spur Ridge. The fire onthe West Bench was starting to catch upto the crew hiking upthe fireline. Erickson called Smokejumper Mackey to warn himof the fire approaching from behind the Spur Ridge. There wasno noticeable wind atthe Tree, but the firefighters could see wind pushing the flames and smoke onthe east-facing slopes across the West Drainage from them. Asthe firefighters onthe West Flank Fireline came closer (about 500to 550 feet below the Zero Point) Erickson sawa bearded McCall Smokejumper (Roth) inthe lead. There wasa yellowish glow over the West Bench. Erickson also recognized Mackey, who was the second person from the end asthe group came over the Spur Ridge. Erickson then sawa spot fire appear directly below and west ofhim. He later located this spot fire onthe West Bench near the West Drainage and about 75 feet north ofthe small draw that runs directly upthe slope towards the Tree (fig. 40). Almost instantly the spot started to grow and Erickson called Mackey onthe radio and warned himof the spot fire (about 1610:30). Erickson then took out his camera to take a picture of Mackey near the end ofthe oncoming firefighters. His camera was out of film. At about 1611, Archuleta and Doehring, who were atthe Photo Point located onthe Main Ridge and north and east of Erickson, took a series offour
photographs. The first two photos show the last three West Flank Firefight- ers before they disappeared into the Draw 445 feet down the fireline from the Zero Point. Haugh, Erickson, Archuleta and Doehring all report that the fire behind the Spur Ridge roared asit crossed the fireline. Our analysis indicates that this occurred near the Stump. The fire burned quickly upthe slope tothe topof the ridge. We later determined from the photos that at this time the northeastern edge ofthe fire onthe West Bench was about 200 feet south ofthe Draw and directly below the Tree. The West Bench fire had been advancing ina hook and run or “J” pattern, and the bottom edge ofthe “J” was now 200to 300 feet from Erickson’s spot fire. Erickson said the sky was all orange and the spot fire was growing rapidly ashe turned and headed upthe fireline toward the Zero Point (time, 1611:15). This was the last observation about the fire below the West Flank Firefighters and leads into our three most probable scenarios. Figure 40—Approximate fire perimeter positions between 1607 and 1614 on July 6, 1994. These perimeters are estimated from reconstruction of events, firefighter movements and witness statements. As such, the perimeters are subject to some uncertainty. J. Kautz, U.S. Forest Service, Missoula, MT.
spot fire could have been the source for the fire that burned east upthe slope and overran the12 firefighters anda short time later H-2. Erickson’s spot fire quickly merged with the main fire and continued burning toward H-2and the saddle below the Drop Zone. The fire coming through the saddle below the Drop Zone cut the two helitack crewmen off from the East Drainage. “U”-Shaped Fire Front—Asone moves northeast from the area where Erickson saw the spot fire, the vegetation changes from predominantly Gambel oakto pinyon-juniper and grass with some scattered Douglas-fir. The conifers and grass extend upthe slope tothe Photo Point. Erickson said that fire onthe east-facing slopes (covered mostly with pinyon-juniper and grass) was more advanced than the fire onthe west-facing slopes. This suggests that the fire was spreading faster inthe pinyon-juniper and grass than inthe oak. This is consistent with observations from other fires. Asthe spot fire observed by Erickson spread into the grass and pinyon-juniper, it moved northeast upthe slope reaching a point onthe Main Ridge approxi- mately 100 feet north ofthe Zero Point. This fire could have been the source ofthe heat felt by Robertson and Archuleta as they traveled north along the Main Ridge directly east ofthe Photo Point. When the West Flank Fireline Group neared the draw atthe base ofthe last steep pitch inthe fireline, the main fire front was 450 feet west and 400 feet southwest of them (about 1612). Fire extended upthe south side ofthe Spur Ridge tothe Main Ridge, around the bottom ofthe Spur Ridge, across the Draw below the Tree, and partially upthe slope below the Photo Point. The fire burning upthe slope inthe pinyon-juniper and grass north of them may have been even closer. This suggests that by 1613 the fire front formed a “U” or concave shape with the West Flank Fireline Group inthe middle (fig. 40). From a physical perspective, such a “U” shaped fire front is inherently unstable. Theun- burned area within the concave fire front received heat from three sides rather than one. The presence of fire on multiple sides increased the amount of energy incident onthe vegetation around the firefighters. This caused rapid ignition and fire spread upthe last section ofthe fireline. The sequence of rapid preheating, ignition, and fire spread would likely have been per- ceived bythe firefighters, especially those inthe lower portion ofthe West Flank Fireline Group, as nearly instantaneous ignition ofthe vegetation around them. Movement ofair in front ofthe fire asit ignited a large area and accelerated upthe fireline could have been the source ofthe blast ofhot air felt by Hipke. It could also have caused convective heating followed by radiant heating asthe flames progressed upthe slope. Doehring and Archuleta’s photographs and Erickson’s observations place fire below the West Flank Fireline Group. The wind, slope, and vegetation combined to result inthe fire spreading rapidly north upthe West Drainage and east tothe topof the Main Ridge. The sequence of fire perimeters shown in figure 40 would have been essentially the same inall cases presented in this report. Surfacing Smoke Column—A turbulent gust associated with strong westerly winds pushing against or through the smoke column isan alternate source for the blast ofair that hit Hipke. This assumes that fire was burning upthe south side ofthe Spur Ridge and northeast upthe West Drainage directly west ofthe West Flank Fireline Group. Itis possible that the strong
the column of smoke and burning gases against the slope around the firefighters. Asthe gust hit the slope it carried hot air, smoke, and embers. Evidence suggests that smoke existed in sufficient quantities to impair their breathing, vision, or both. The embers and hot air enhanced preheating, ignition, and fire spread around the firefighters hiking upthe fireline. Firefighters breathing inthe hot gases were quickly incapacitated. As Hipke hiked upthe last 80 feet ofthe fireline and crossed over the Main Ridge, he suffered burns although hewas attempting to shield his ears and face with his hands. The most severe occurred onhis right side and back, with some lesser injury tohis left side. Hipke states that the burns occurred shortly before and during the blast ofhot air. Neither Hipke nor Erickson remember seeing flames nearby when they exited the fireline and crossed over the Main Ridge. Ifthe column ofhot air and smoke above the fire was pushed against the slope, convective heating would have occurred before the vegetation ignited. Radiant heating would have followed. Itis also possible that smoke could have obscured the firefighter’s view of flames inthe area while not fully shielding them from the radiant heat emitted bythe flames. While they donot recall seeing flames near the Zero Point, the lack of fire atthe topof the ridge, and Hipke’s testimony about the blast ofair, lend some support tothe possibility that the smoke column surfaced against the slope. General Upslope Spread—While the West Flank Fireline Group hiked upthe lower portion (south ofthe Spur Ridge) ofthe fireline, they were moving inthe same general direction asthe fire (predominantly north). The fire was spreading north upthe West Drainage at about 3 feet per second while the firefighters were moving at4 to5 feet per second. Asthe group passed the Stump and started upand over the Spur Ridge their rate of travel slowed to less than 2 feet per second. After crossing the Spur Ridge, the fireline turns eastward upslope tothe Main Ridge. While the path between the point where the fireline crests the Spur Ridge and the Draw isnot steep, the footing was rough and uneven dueto the multiple oak stobs along the ground. We estimate that the firefighters traveled between 3and 4 feet per second. Of even greater importance isthe relative direction of travel. Asthe firefighters hiked over the Spur Ridge and started along the last segment ofthe fireline, their direction of travel relative tothe fire’s major direction of spread changed. They were moving generally east, while the fire was spreading generally northeast. Thus, asthe group passed the Stump, the distance separating them and the fire began to decrease. Asthe crew moved through the Draw and started upthe last and steepest section ofthe West Flank Fireline their rate of travel decreased to between 1and 3 feet per second. The fire spread upslope as fast as9 feet per second. Between 2and 3 minutes elapsed between the time the first members ofthe West Flank Fireline Group passed the Draw until they were caught bythe fire. We plotted the high and low estimated fire spread rates against the rate of firefighter movement for the period 1607 to 1614. Figure 41 presents these data. Our analysis indicates that when the first members ofthe West Flank Fireline Group neared the Draw (time, 1610), the fire was approximately 450 feet south and southwest of them. By 1611 the fire was directly below them.
Using crew travel rates taken from the chronology and the average fire spread, we estimate that the fire reached the firefighters at 1613:15. Figure 41 illustrates the speed with which the fire caught and overburned the firefighters. Inthe previous sections we presented two scenarios by which the fire caught and overran the firefighters. This analysis suggests general fire spread upthe Draw below the last section ofthe West Flank Fireline could have overrun the firefighters: a third scenario. The blast ofhot air felt by Hipke could have been associated with the expansion ofair in front ofthe fire asit quickly spread upthe slope. Figure 41—Time/distance diagram depicting the speed and distance cov- ered bythe firefighters hiking upthe last portion ofthe West Flank Fireline versus that for the fire. The data used for this figure were obtained from appendix B. The high and low firefighter travel rates were obtained by actual reenactments bytwo physiologically different adult males (see table B-4). Note that the actual speed ofthe West Flank Fireline Group was slower than the lowest reenacted values. The fire spread rates are approximate values taken from table B-8.
the top ofthe Main Ridge, moving generally north, perhaps inan attempt to reach the Drop Zone where they hoped to meet the helicopter. Asthe fire burned eastward across the saddle, it would have blocked the helitack crewmembers from following the others out the East Drainage. Possibly inan effort to reach an outcropping of rocks, the two firefighters continued northwest. They died inthe bottom ofa steep narrow gulley. The gulley would have acted asa chimney, channeling hot gases and smoke upthe slope to their location about a minute after they entered the gulley. Contributing Factors—Each ofthe three proposed fire scenarios provide some explanation for the rapid entrapment ofthe crew and the blast ofhot air felt by Hipke. Witness statements indicate that the firefighters were aware that the fire was burning asa wide front behind them. There has been some question why the firefighters did not increase their rate of travel ordid not drop their gear to exit the area more quickly. We have not addressed psychological or emotional factors in this report, but leave that topic for future analyses. Other factors reduced the ability ofthe firefighters to fully identify the location ofthe fire. Postfire evidence did not indicate an organized attempt bythe group to deploy their fire shelters. This suggests that the group was surprised bythe fire. Asthe firefighters hiked upthe West Flank Fireline they could see the fire from some selected locations (for example, Hipke saw the fire below them from a location near the Stump). However, much ofthe time, the6 to12 foot high oak brush hindered their view ofthe fire. The smoke inthe air further reduced the ability ofthe firefighters tosee the fire. Witnesses state the noise from the fire wasas loud as that produced bya train orjet airplane. Itis likely that the area around the fatality site was quickly engulfed in smoke just prior toor during the burnover. The lack ofa clear view ofthe fire and the loud noise created bythe fire would have prevented the group from fully sensing how fast the fire was closing the gap between itand them. Their likely inability to identify the location ofthe fire isone explanation for the evidence suggesting that the group was surprised bythe fire and did not realize how close the fire wasor where togo to escape it. We suspect that the “U” shaped fire front occurred. However, we also believe it likely that the strong westerly winds pushed the column ofhot air and smoke against the slope. Our analysis suggests that general upslope fire spread was two to three times faster than the firefighters’ upslope travel rates. Fuel-Air Explosion—Hot air, smoke, and burning embers hit Smoke- jumper Hipke 15 feet west ofthe Zero Point; he jumped and fell forward. When he stood uphe hadto raise his hands to continue to shield his face from the heat. Hewas burned onhis back and sides with some indication of slightly more severe burning onhis right side (Hospital Report 1994). The hot air blast originated from behind him. There has been considerable discussion asto the source ofthe blast ofair. In fact, this evidence raised questions about the possibility ofa fuel-air explosion over the West Flank Fireline. The other factor suggesting a fuel-air explosion isthe apparent suddenness with which the fire overran the12 firefighters onthe West Flank Fireline. The firefighters were burned while still in line, many with their packs still on, and only afew showed signs that they had tried to deploy their fire shelters.
that combustible gases accumulated in sufficient concentration to result inan explosion. Although several firefighters testify that winds onthe West Flank Fireline were calm, we believe that strong winds and turbulence existed inthe air above the fireline. This turbulence, the general instability, and the topography lead usto believe it unlikely that combustible gases could have accumulated in sufficient concentrations to support an explosion. Conclusions______________________________________________________ The South Canyon Fire tragically demonstrates the fire behavior that can occur given the appropriate combination of weather, topography, fuels, and fire. Oneof our most frustrating observations was that while fire behavior during the afternoon of July 6, 1994, canbe characterized as extreme, itwas normal given the environmental conditions. The fire wasa direct conse- quence ofthe fuel, weather, and topographical factors. Similar alignments of fire environment factors and the resulting fire behavior are not uncommon. We have summarized the weather, fuel, and topographical information, and presented a brief overview ofthe firefighter movements relative tothe fire. Using the fire environment analysis and chronology, we presented what we believe are the most likely fire behavior scenarios. Until the afternoon of July 6, the high intensity fire behavior consisted of occasional short duration torching of individual trees and narrow uphill runs inthe fire’s interior. At approximately 1600 the wind, slope, and fire location combined to result ina dramatic transition wherein the fire began burning through the live fuel canopy asa continuous flaming front. This report focused onthe mechanisms that ledto the dramatic transition from alow intensity ground fire toa fire that was burning through the vegetation canopy. The second part ofthe discussion addressed the specific fire behavior that ledto the entrapment of14 firefighters. We have drawn a number of discussion points from the analysis. Some of these points will be readily apparent to firefighters. Others maybe less evident. We believe that all are important. • Topography can dramatically influence local wind patterns. Surface winds in mountainous terrain are highly variable. Areas oflow or calm winds can exist while other areas experience dramatically different wind direction, windspeed, or both. These changes can occur without visible warning across relatively short distances, especially when the area is subjected to large-scale weather influences such as frontal passages. Wind information is needed from multiple locations around the fire perimeter. This information should be communicated toall fire personnel. • Vegetation and topography can reduce a firefighter’s ability tosee a fire or other influencing factors. Complex topography and dense shrub or tree canopies can restrict the ability of firefighters to sense, visually or otherwise, changes in wind, fire behavior, and fire location. This emphasizes the need for adequate observers and lookouts. • Current and past fire behavior often does not indicate the poten- tial fire behavior that could occur. Maximum possible fire spread, flame heights, and energy release are determined by comparing present and near-term future fuel, weather, and topography to their state during past demonstrations of extreme fire behavior, possibly at other fires. The
morning of July 6 consisted oflow-intensity downslope spread. Atno time previous tothe afternoon of July 6did it exhibit continuous high- intensity burning inthe Gambel oak canopy. Previous experience and observations of high intensity fire behavior and training in fire environ- ment assessment are tools that canbe used to anticipate potential fire behavior. • The longer a fire burns and the larger it gets, the greater the likelihood of high-intensity fire behavior at some location around the perimeter. Not always isa fire ignited inan ideal location for high- intensity burning. However given sufficient time, alow-intensity fire will often reach a position where fuel, weather and terrain combine synergis- tically to produce high-intensity fire behavior. While we have not evalu- ated such probabilities analytically, intuitively it seems that the greater the range of conditions, the greater the potential fora rapid change in fire behavior at some location along the fire perimeter. Such was the case for the South Canyon Fire on July 6. Knowledge about the location ofa fire perimeter is necessary to adequately assess fire potential. • The transition from a slow-spreading, low-intensity fire toa fast- moving, high-intensity fire often occurs rapidly. This seems to surprise firefighters most often in live fuels, possibly because green vegetation is associated with reduced ignition risk. Wedo not fully understand the exact mechanisms triggering these transitions. But observations of past fire behavior indicate that such transitions often occur when there are significant changes in windspeed or wind direction, fire location (that isat the top ofthe slope versus the base ofthe slope), orin the quantity of live and dead components inthe vegetation canopy. Live green vegetation can support and even promote high-intensity burning. Monitoring fire position relative to alignment of wind, slope, and live and dead fuels can assist firefighters in recognizing potentially hazardous fire behavior. • Escape route transit time is related to both topography and route length. Escape routes should be considered in relation to potential maximum-intensity fire behavior rather than past or present fire behav- ior. The ideal escape route includes a downhill direction over the shortest possible distance tothe safety zone, thereby maximizing firefighter travel rates while minimizing fire spread rates. • The underburned Gambel oak was significant in that itdid not provide a safety zone. The blowup did not occur inthe previously underburned Gambel oak. The blowup occurred when the fire changed from a relatively low-intensity surface fire toa high-intensity fire burning inthe canopy ofthe green (nonunderburned) Gambel oak near the bottom ofthe West Drainage. Asthe fire burned upthe slopes from the nonunderburned into the previously underburned Gambel oak, energy release rates and spread rates would have increased over their already high values (appendix B, table B-8). Thus, the underburned Gambel oak caused increased fire intensity asthe fire burned above the West Flank Fireline, butit was not a factor for the burning below the fireline and therefore did not contribute significantly tothe entrapment ofthe 14 firefighters. However, the amount of unburned vegetation remaining above the West Flank Fireline precluded it from being an
when working adjacent to underburned shrub vegetation. • Smoke can significantly reduce the firefighter’s abilities to sense changes in fire behavior. This is certainly realized byany firefighter who has hadto breath smoke. There is some evidence that the area around the fatality site was quickly engulfed in smoke just prior toor during the burnover. The lack ofa clear view ofthe fire and the loud noise created bythe fire would have prevented the group from fully sensing how fast the fire was closing the gap between itand them and may have distracted the group from their objective of reaching safety. Their likely inability to identify the location ofthe fire isone explanation for the evidence suggesting that the group was surprised bythe fire and did not realize how close the fire wasor where togo to escape it. Lookouts positioned outside the burn area or overhead can communicate urgency and help firefighters identify the best escape routes relative tothe fire position, direction, and rate of spread. Our analysis emphasizes the often dramatic changes in fire behavior that can occur when fire is exposed to steep slopes, winds, and relatively continu- ous fuels. Perhaps even more important isthe observation that not all of these factors are needed, rather only oneor two are needed fora blowup to occur. None ofthe findings and observations discussed in this study repre- sent new breakthroughs in wildland fire behavior understanding. Rather the findings support the need for increased understanding ofthe relations between the fire environment and fire behavior. Wecan also conclude that fire managers must continue to monitor and assess both present fire behavior and potential future fire behavior given the possible range of environmental factors. During the review process, some ofthe reviewers commented that they were left with a feeling of “so what” after reading the manuscript. In fact, this isone ofthe points that can and should be drawn from our study ofthe fire. While relatively high-intensity fire behavior was demonstrated, itwas normal and even ordinary behavior given the combination of environmental factors. Tragically, what was not normal or ordinary was that 14 firefighters were caught inthe middle ofthe fire and could not escape. Asa last note tothe readers, we want tosay that the most difficult task in this whole process has been achieving a balance between analysis, calcula- tions, and extrapolations onone endof the scale, and heartache, feelings of loss, and even anger onthe other end. Peace of mind, ifat all possible, can come only by accepting the fact that humans are part of nature, yet understand just parts ofit and master even less. Our efforts were directed toward increased understanding, with the hope that the knowledge gained will help to avert similar future incidents.
Anon. 1994. Personal communication between local residents andT. Putnam. Bell, A. 1994. Personal communication with T. Putnam. Video taken at various times from July 4 through afternoon of July 6 from Canyon Creek Estates. Biastoch, W. 1995. Personal communication with R. Bartlette. November. Bossert, J.E.; Harlow, F.H.; Linn, R.R.; Reisner, J.M.; White, A.B.; Winterkamp, J.L. 1998. Coupled weather and wildfire behavior modeling atLos Alamos: an overview. Proc. of Second Confer- ence on Fire and Forest Meteorology. January 11-16, 1998, Phoenix, AZ. Boston, MA: American Meteorological Society. 8p. Catchpole, W.R.; Catchpole, E.A.; Butler, B.W.; Rothermel, R.C; Morris, G.A.; Latham, D.J. 1998. Rate of Spread of Free-Burning Fires in Woody Fuels ina Wind Tunnel. Combust. Sci. and Tech. V. 131:1-36. Erickson, K. 1996. Personal communication with T. Putnam. August. Good, D. 1996. Personal communication with R. Bartlette. January. Haines, D. A. 1988. A lower atmosphere severity index for wildland fires. National Weather Digest. 13(2): 23-27. Hipke, E. 1994. Personal communication with T. Putnam. August. Hipke, E. 1995. Personal communication with T. Putnam andR. Bartlette. November. Hipke, E. 1996. Video reconstruction of Smokejumper Eric Hipke’s escape route along West Flank Fireline. Hopf, M. 1996. Personal communication with B. Butler. Hospital Report. 1994. On file with T. Putnam of USDA Forest Serv- ice Missoula Technology and Development Center, Missoula, MT. Husari, S. 1996. Personal communication with B. Butler, R. Bartlette, L. Bradshaw, J. Cohen, andP. Andrews. February. IMRT. 1994. Report ofthe Interagency Management Review Team (South Canyon Fire). October 17, 1994. Boise, ID: U.S. Depart- ment of Agriculture, U.S. Department ofthe Interior, National Weather Service, National Park Service, National Interagency Fire Center. 77p. IMRT. 1995. Final Report ofthe Interagency Management Review Team. June 26, 1995. Boise, ID: U.S. Department of Agriculture, U.S. Department ofthe Interior, National Weather Service, National Park Service, National Interagency Fire Center. 80p. OSHA. 1995. Occupational Safety and Health Administration’s Investigation ofthe South Canyon Fire, February 8, 1995. Washington DC: U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 9p. Petrilli, T. 1995. Personal communication with T. Putnam andR. Bartlette. November. Petrilli, T. 1996. Personal communication with B. Butler, L. Bradshaw, R. Bartlette, andJ. Cohen. Spring. Pielke, R.A.; Cotton, W.R.; Walko, R.L.; Tremback, C.J.; Nicholls, M.E.; Moran, M.D.; Wesley, D.A.; Lee, T.J.; Copeland, J.H. 1992. A comprehensive meteorological modeling system-RAMS. Me- teor. Atmos. Phys., 49: 69-91. Russo, W.; Williams, W. 1995. Pushed tothe Limit. NFPA Journal, March/April 1995:36-50. Scholz, B. 1995. Personal communication with T. Putnam, R. Bartlette, andB. Butler. November. Scholz, B. 1996. Personal communication with T. Putnam, R. Bartlette. Sharkey, B. 1994. Personal communication with T. Putnam on physiological analysis of firefighter movement. Shepard, T. 1995. Personal communication with R. Bartlette. October. USDI. 1976. Accident Report Battlement Creek Fire Fatalities and Injury, July 17, 1976. Washington DC: U.S. Department ofthe Interior. Unpublished report. 125p. USDA, USDI, and USDC. 1994. South Canyon Fire Investigation (Report ofthe South Canyon Fire accident investigation team). Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture, U.S. Depart- ment ofthe Interior, U.S. Department of Commerce. U.S. Govern- ment Printing Office, Region 8. Report 573-183. 243p. References_______________________________________________________ Figure 42—Panorama ofthe South Canyon Fire site taken 2 years after the fire from the ridge directly west across the West Drainage from the West Flank (Photo isa composite oftwo photo- graphs taken byT. Putnam).
Backing fire—Fire spreading into the wind or downslope. Bench—Topographical feature characterized asan area ona slope that is approximately level orat least significantly more so than the surround- ing terrain. Blowup—A rapid transition from a surface fire exhibiting relatively low intensity, toa fire burning inthe whole vegetation complex, surface to canopy, and demonstrating dramatically larger flame heights, higher energy release rates, and faster rates of spread. Crown fire—A fire that burns through the entire vegetation canopy. Itmay ormay not include a surface fire burning through the dead leaves and litter near the ground surface. Drainage—Topographical feature that isa deep gulley, draw, or valley. Fire front—Usually refers tothe leading edge ofthe fire, but may also include any part ofthe flaming perimeter ofa fire. Fireline—A fire control line formed by removing surface litter and organic matter to expose mineral soil. Often appears much like a rough narrow trail. Flareup—A relatively short duration sudden increase in fire intensity or rate of spread over a small area. Usually involves oneor a small group of trees or shrubs. Foliar—Pertains to leaves or stems in vegetation canopy. Often used inthe term “foliar moisture content.” Head fire—A fire spreading with the wind, or upslope, or both. Helitack—In this report the term applies tothe firefighters that perform helicopter management and attack activities. Hotspot—A small ignition often dueto burning or smoldering debris rolling down hill across a fireline. This can also mean to patrol along a fireline looking for burning debris and embers that have crossed the fireline. Hotshot—Intensively trained fire personnel, usually assembled in20- person teams and especially noted for their effectiveness in building fireline. Intensity—Inthe general sense intensity implies the size ofthe flames, the fire’s spread rate, and the rate of energy released from the fire. Plume—This term refers tothe smoke column produced bya fire. Reburn—Fire burning through an area that has previously burned but still includes some flammable fuel. Shear layer—Meteorological phenomenon generated atthe intersection oftwo air masses flowing in different directions. The location in space where these masses interact is subject to viscous shear stresses. These stresses can generate severe turbulence. Slopover—Fire crossing a fireline or some other barrier to fire spread.
been lofted into the air above a larger burning fire and then redistrib- uted over the ground, often ahead ofa fire front. Spur ridge—A small ridge extending from a larger much more prominent main ridge. Stob—A stake or stump ofa shrub or small tree left after the upper portion ofthe plant has been removed by cutting or burning. Surface fire—Fire burning inthe litter and organic debris onor near the ground. Torching—The rapid intense burning from the ground up through the canopy ina single or small group of trees or shrubs. Similar toa flareup. Transition—The change from fire burning inone fuel stratum to another along with associated change in intensity. Most often refers tothe change from a relatively low intensity surface fire exhibiting slow spread rates and low energy release toone burning with much higher intensities, faster spread rates, and higher energy release rates. Venturi effect—This term refers tothe increase in velocity ofa stream ofgas or liquid asit passes from one area through another area of smaller size or diameter. Conversely, ifthe area through which the stream is passing becomes larger, the velocity ofthe stream will decrease.
Travel Rates, and Fire Spread Rates _________________________________ The chronology and data tables in this appendix are based on witness statements, synchronous events, distances, and measured times from actual on-site reenactments of crew movement between key locations. The information relies heavily on interviews conducted bythe original accident investigation team, interviews conducted bythe OSHA investiga- tors, interviews bythe author John N. Maclean, and follow-up interviews conducted bythe authors of this report. Attempts were made to resolve conflicting testimony. However, inthe event that the conflict could notbe resolved, earlier interviews took precedent over later interviews, some of which were collected 1to 2 years after the incident. Certain key events and times were crucial because they linked so many people together. The first event was the initial column of smoke that was observed inthe early development ofthe blowup. The small column devel- oped into a large plume of smoke ina short time (about 60 seconds). Several firefighters saw fire spread upthe east side ofthe West Drainage within 2to 3 minutes. Firefighters Petrilli, Kelso, Shepard, Hipke, Erickson, and others saw this event, which initially synchronized their movements. Within a minute, Hotshot Gray noted the time as 1604 hours. The fire- fighters started to move to their safety zones. The next key synchronous event was when Smokejumpers Archuleta and Doehring took the picture of Smokejumper Mackey and two Prineville firefighters hiking upthe West Flank Fireline. Although Erickson did not geta photo because his camera was out of film, his memory of what hesaw through the viewfinder indicates that his attempt was made about the same time that Archuleta and Doehring’s photos were taken. This links Archuleta and Doehring to Erickson. Hipke’s testimony links himto Erickson and the first half ofthe Prineville Hotshots to arrive atthe fire, andto Smokejumpers Roth, Thrash, and Mackey onthe West Flank Fireline. Archuleta’s testimony links himto the firefighters working onthe Main Ridge (the Group consisted ofthe BLM/U.S. Forest Service firefighters outof Colorado and the second half ofthe Prineville Hotshots to arrive atthe fire; we have labeled them the Main Ridge Group). The Main Ridge Group headed into the East Drainage at 1614. Firefighters Blanco and Shepard and Helitack Crewmembers Browning and Tyler canbe linked together because they moved some red personal equip- ment bags near H-2as the Main Ridge Group was going into the East Drainage. Distances between most locations were measured on site. Others were estimated from measurements on topographic maps. We used the measured distances and travel times to calculate rates of travel between specific locations andto estimate the sequence of events. Taking into account the sequence of events and physiological constraints on firefighter travel times between geographic points, we estimate that, while the times inthe narra- tive are not absolute, they are accurate to within 1 minute andin many cases within 15 seconds. Chronology, Fire Behavior, and Weather We have attempted to include a reference tothe primary information source for each time segment in table B-1. In many cases this isa single
frequently. Inthe table weuse the acronym SCR (South Canyon Report) to designate the original investigation team report (USDA, USDI, and USDC 1994). When the source is listed as time: Putnam, then the time is calculated from reenacted travel rates. Table B-1—Chronology, fire behavior, and weather. Time Firefighters Fire/Weather Source - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - July 2 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1800 South Canyon Fire ignited by lightning. Jo Temple - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - July 3 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1000 Observer in South Canyon calls in fire. Unsure Putnam which side ofthe river itis on. Tentatively called South Canyon. 1030 Call to Sheriff accurately locates fire on north side Jo Temple of river onBLM land. 1100 Sheriff reports South Canyon Fire toBLM. SCR 1410 Sheriff’s office reports fire at half an acre and SCR very active and Sheriff approves useof aircraft. 1416 BLM dispatch requests one load of smokejumpers, SCRan air tanker (T-140), and lead plane (64) to initial attack fire. 1508 Dispatcher cancels initial attack, routes smoke- Fire 1.5 acres in size and burning inSCR jumpers to another fire. continuous fuels. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - July 4 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1200 Fire covers approximately 3 acres. SCR 1450 Local resident reports increased fire activity. SCR 1630 BLM crew watches fire from freeway. Decides to wait until morning to initial attack. 2109 Aerial observer reports fire burning inall directions. Recommends bucket drops. SCR 2200 Fire covers about 11 acres. SCR - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - July 5 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 0630 BLM crew (Blanco and six firefighters) SCR start up East Drainage. 0819 Blanco requests more resources. Fire reported tobe 29 acres in size. SCR 1500 Air tanker makes drop on freeway side of fire. SCR 1730 BLM firefighters start to exit area via West SCR Drainage to repair saws. 1745 Eight smokejumpers orbit fire; they jump in Fire 30 acres in size, smokejumpers SCR light, erratic winds. Mackey is Jumper-in-Charge report erratic winds. Doehring andis in radio contact with Blanco. 1944 Mackey reports fire burning actively. Active burning. SCR 2000 Smokejumpers start building fireline down SCR east side of Main Ridge. 2230 BLM firefighter crew finish repairing saws and gear. Fire covers 50 acres. SCR 2300 Mackey requests two Type-1 crews. SCR
Time Firefighters Fire/Weather Source - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - July 6 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 0030 Eight smokejumpers stop building line dueto SCR poor footing and rolling rocks. 0300 Fire burning actively. SCR 0530- Eleven person BLM/USFS crew start up Ryerson 0630 East Drainage to fire. Blanco is Incident Commander (IC). 0528 Mackey requests helicopter and fixed-wing SCR aircraft. 0800 Blanco’s crew (BLM/USFS) reach Main Ridge SCR and construct second helispot (H-2). 0815 Smokejumpers and BLM crew begin building SCR fireline between H-2and H-1. 0845 Blanco and Mackey plan strategy and tactics. SCR 0930 Helicopter 93R arrives. Blanco, Tyler, and Mackey Smoke observed lowin West Drainage. SCR take a recon flight. Mackey tells smokejumpers to start building fireline down the West Flank. Smoke- jumpers question decision and request discussion. 1027 Eight more smokejumpers arrive over fire. Jumper- Very little wind. Fire covers about 127 acres. SCRin-Charge Hipke requests that Longanecker become Jumper-in-Charge for this plane load. 1113 Completed jumping and cargo drop. SCR 1130 Combined smokejumper crews start down route flagged by Mackey. Longanecker is line scout. SCR 1135 Firefighters discuss pulling outof West Flank Tree 40 yards below main ridge torches. Petrilli Fireline. 5-ft wide run through Gambel oak burns to Doehring the top ofthe ridge. Water drops cool it. 1200 Prineville Hotshots arrive at Canyon Creek SCR Estates helibase. 1230 Ten Prineville Hotshots leave helibase forH-2. SCR 1300 Most firefighters retreat 400ft tothe Tree. Fire flares upon West Flank. The tree that Water drops are effective so group returns to flares upis cut down, leaving the Stump. SCR the Stump and continues working. 1330 Nine Prineville Hotshots start down West Flank Scholz Fireline, Kelso in charge, meet smokejumpers at Stump. 1400 Scholz and second half of Prineville Hotshots Strong gusty winds, overcast skies. Front Scholz at Canyon Creek Estates. approaching. Windsock horizontal (15 miles per hour winds). West Flank Fireline Group and smokejumpers SCR eat lunch on Lunch Spot Ridge. 1415- Scholz calls Shepard to report increased wind Increased smoke on fireline lowin canyon Scholz 1430 and fire becoming more active. Shepard confirms and south of fireline below crew. Photos: Frey itwas windy on Main Ridge. 1445 Longanecker starts down Double Draw to scout Hotspots in Double Draws. SCR fireline. 1510 Longanecker calls for sawyers. Afew jumpers Flareup in Double Draws. Petrilli, SCR start to move south from Lunch Spot and east into Double Draws. 1515 Scholz and second half of Prinevile Hotshots Squirrely winds onH-2. SCR arrive atH-2. Blanco, Shepard, Scholz confer. Winds very light at Zero Point. 1520 Cold front arrives. Steadily increasing SCR but erratic winds.
Time Firefighters Fire/Weather Source 1530 Second half of Prineville crew lined outon When firefighters throw brush up into airon Scholz Main Ridge. Start atH-2 improving line toward Main Ridge, strong winds blow it over ridge H-1. Told to make it20 ft wide. to east. Scholz carries 2 cubitainers of water down Winds gusty ontop of line. No wind down Scholz West Flank Fireline. Haugh and Brixey West Flank Fireline. Sun begins to break through. about 150ft below Zero Point. Some BLM/USFS eat lunch on Main Ridge, Calm wind, fire burning in litter under oak brush. Byers others working near H-1. Doehring, Erickson, sent by Mackey togo Winds pick upon Lunch Spot Ridge but subside SCR, back toward Main Ridge and hotspot line. on West Flank Fireline. Erickson Hipke working along the fireline from Lunch Doehring Spot toward Zero Point. Most ofthe West Flank Group working between 1450 and 1880 ft from Zero Point. 1539 Scholz meets Roth at stump (850ft). No wind on West Flank. Sunny, skies clearing. Scholz They move log off line and talk briefly. Time: Putnam 1545 Longanecker gets water drop. Smoke- Continued fire activity south ofthe Double Petrilli jumpers spread between Lunch Spot and Draws. Longanecker Petrilli Photo Point. Some members ofBLM crew take break at Wind at rocks calm to5 miles per hour. Byers base of rocks under H-1. Scholz leaves water with Roth and starts back No wind on West Flank, fire calm. Sunny on Scholz up line to Main Ridge. West Flank. 1553 Scholz attop of Main Ridge. Winds blowing about 45 miles per hour from Scholz the west. Photo: Shepard 1554 Ryerson requests next water drop togo Spot crosses Main Ridge fireline and burning ac- Ryerson to main ridge. tively in green fuel. Spot fire on west side of Main Byers Ridge, 200ft south of Zero Point getting active. Scholz 1555 Erickson and Doehring move up West Flank Wind and fire calm on West Flank. Erickson Fireline, meet Roth at850 feet. Roth says he Doehring will take water on toward Lunch Spot. Ryerson gets water drop on Main Ridge but Spot fire active on Main Ridge south of Zero Ryerson water blew to east and misses fire. Pilot leaves Point. Winds on Main Ridge estimated at35 Good toget another bucket of water. miles per hour. Photo: Shepard Petrilli and other smokejumpers south of Lunch Increased winds south of Lunch Spot (estimated Petrilli Spot photograph crown fire south of Double at35 miles per hour). Fire spreads rapidly upslope Longanecker Draws area. Call to Longanecker to pull out. in pinyon-juniper and firs within fire perimeter. Three fire runs occur, flames are about 100ft long. 1556 Good sees spot fires in West Drainage. Numerous spot fires near bottom of West Drainage. Good Heard firefighters talking about spots. 1558 Erickson and Doehring leave Roth andNo wind on West Flank. Erickson start up West Flank Fireline. Doehring 1600 Scholz requests Main Ridge Group move Skies clear overhead, clouds over Storm King Mt. Scholz to Zero Point to help with spot fire. Winds 45 miles per hour from the west. Fire runs inside perimeter. Wind blows Byer’shat off near spot fire SCRon Main Ridge. Byers Roth left Stump with cubitainer of water. Time: Putnam 1601 Eight smokejumpers 630ft south of Lunch Smoke in bottom of West Drainage below smoke Photos: Spot. Longanecker lower onthe south side jumpers. Main Ridge spot fire active in brush Petrilli of Double Draws. across line. Shepard Good
1602 Petrilli sees fire 35yds north of base of Double Fire starts rapid runup the east-facing slope Petrilli Draws, calls Mackey. Mackey tells them toget across the West Drainage from smokejumpers. outof draws. Petrilli and other smokejumpers Fire also burning upthe West Drainage. Petrilli hike toward Lunch Spot. estimates winds of35 miles per hour athis location. 1603- Someone calls dispatch requesting retardant, Longanecker 1607 heard tosay “we have a real bad situation here.” 1604 Kelso calls Shepard to report spot fire had Fire in West Drainage. Strong winds on Main Shepard crossed West Drainage below West Flank Ridge, Spot fire on Main Ridge is active. Scholz Fireline Group. Shepard, “Get out of there.” Kelso, “Weare onour way.” Scholz, “Things are getting complicated.” Roth meets Thrash, Hipke, Hagen on West Column of smoke in West Drainage behind Erickson Flank Fireline at1,450ft. Talked 30sec then (south of) and below Lunch Spot Ridge. Hipke saw column. Shepard relays message about spot fire to Strong winds. Scholz Main Ridge Group, Blanco relays to Ryerson, Gray-SCR Mackey. Gray checks his watch. Statement by Main Ridge Group individuals “remember this time.” Erickson and Doehring meet Archuleta onNo wind on West Flank but building column of Erickson West Flank Fire line near 450ft, they hear smoke visible to south over West Drainage. Doehring order toget out. Blanco and Shepard atH-2 tell crews on Main Column building in West Drainage. Photo: Shepard Ridge at Zero Point togo toH-1. 1605 Three smokejumpers and West Flank Fireline Column of smoke noticeably bigger. Erickson Group leave 1,450ft with Thrash, Roth, Hipke Hipke and Hagen. Last water drop on Main Ridge. Good sees very Column greatly increases in size, west winds Good large column and spots, returns to helibase to45 miles per hour or greater over Main Ridge. Ryerson drop bucket so that hecan ferry firefighters off hill. Chin strap needed on hard-hats. Crews at Zero Point on Main Ridge start moving Bucket drop cooled spot on Main Ridge. Winds Scholz toward H-1 through cooled spot fire. very strong. Thirty smokejumpers arrive bybus 1⁄4 mile west of base of West Drainage. They goto Canyon Creek Estates when fire blows up. 1606 Erickson, Doehring, and Archuleta at Tree, they Gray-black smoke in column, then flames reach Doehring meet Haugh and Brixey. Tells Haugh of order totop of east-facing slopes across West Drainage Erickson goto H-1. Haugh calls Blanco about spot fire from jumpers. Fire is moving north upthe drainage. Brixey across drainage, Blanco responds toget out. Haugh Petrilli and seven smokejumpers meet Mackey Fire rolls upthe east-facing slopes across West Petrilli 100ft below Lunch Spot. Mackey tells smoke- Drainage. Winds blowing 45 miles per hour. Thomas jumpers to head up ridge toward H-1. Shepard 1607 Mackey checks on Longanecker by radio then Time: Putnam moves north toward West Flank Fireline Group. Longanecker Hipke near Stump at830 ft. Sees fire on their Fire on West Bench north of Lunch Spot Ridge. Hipke (east) side of West Drainage. Fire front forms a “U” shape in bottom andup both Time: Putnam sides of West Drainage. Petrilli and seven smokejumpers pass Lunch Time: Putnam Spot and continue toward H-1. 1608 Mackey at1,450ft, running. Fire on West bench behind Mackey. Time: Putnam Doehring, Archuleta, Brixey head totop of West Flank Fireline. 1608:30 Haugh, Erickson hear fire roar. They see Fire on Bench near Jumper Start Point (1,450ft) Haugh first smokejumpers in West Flank Fireline and near West Flank Fireline. Erickson Group coming across topof Spur Ridge. Time: Putnam Time Firefighters Fire/Weather Source
1608:40 Hipke ontop of Spur Ridge (680ft), sees Fire’s northward spread keeping pace with north- Hipke Mackey atend of West Flank Fireline Group. ward movement of firefighter crews. Fire crosses Time:Putnam the West Flank Fireline near 1,450ft. 1609 Main Ridge Group, BLM/USFS group near Fire rapidly moving up slope toward Rocks and Robertson Rocks on Main Ridge. Scholz commands Hotshot H-1. Scholz Crew to “Reverse and move!” Ryerson tells her Byers Crew togo toH-2. Time: Putnam A jumper radios “We’re headed fora good Shepard spot.” Sounds winded, urgent. 1610 Walking steadily from the Double Draws, Time: Putnam Longanecker arrives at Lunch Spot. Doehring, Archuleta, Brixey reach Main Ridge. Doehring First part of Main Ridge Group passing Zero Time: Putnam Point on their wayto H-2. Erickson, whois atthe Tree, sees hardhats of Fire front burning on south side of Spur Ridge Time: Putnam the West Flank Fireline Group as they cross over near Stump. Spur Ridge. Thrash isin the lead and Mackey is second to last in line. Erickson can see fire behind and below the hardhats. Heand Haugh yell atthe firefighters togo faster. Erickson calls Mackey to tell him about the fire behind the Spur Ridge. 1610:30 Thrash nears Draw (445ft), says “Shelters?” Hipke Hipke keeps moving up fireline. Erickson sees Spot Fire down the slope directly Spot Fire is burning on northwest corner of Erickson west and below the West Flank Fireline Group. West Bench, about 75ft north ofthe Draw that Time: Putnam runs down the slope from the Tree tothe West Drainage. Growing rapidly. Erickson at Tree (200ft) radios Mackey to warn Fire on south side of Spur Ridge “roars” asit Erickson him about Spot Fire. burns upthe slope past the Stump and crosses Time: Putnam the fireline. 1610:45 Archuleta and Doehring at Photo Point on Main Fire burning uphill behind Spur Ridge near Erickson Ridge. Archuleta asks Doehring for her camera. Stump and across west slopes of West Drainage. Time: Putnam Haugh and Erickson at Tree. Erickson asks Haugh toget his (Erickson’s) camera outof his pack. 1611 Blanco atH-2 calls Dispatch and says that they Blanco are losing the fire andto send air tankers. Archuleta and Doehring on Main Ridge 110ft Skyis orange. Photos: north oftop of West Flank Fireline at Photo Archuleta Point, Archuleta takes two photos of Mackey and Doehring twoof the firefighters located about 580ft down Time: Putnam the fireline from the Zero Point. Doehring takes two photos of same area then starts moving toH-2. Erickson at Tree frames one photo at similar angle Erickson to Archuleta, butis outof film. Time: Putnam 1611:15 Haugh, Erickson start up fireline. Hipke at325 ft. Fire “roars” onway upto Main Ridge south of Erickson Archuleta walks tothe “Y” (a fork inthe trail Spur Ridge. Archuleta located about 60ft south ofthe Zero Point). Time: Putnam 1612 Hipke at Tree (200ft). Time: Putnam Helicopter approaches H-2, pilot sees firefighters Fire along topof Main Ridge between H-1and Good running north along Main Ridge, towering smoke Spur Ridge, 150to 200ft flame lengths. column obscures area tothe south near H-1. Last of Main Ridge Group and Byers pass top Fire front at base of Spur Ridge about to enter Time: Putnam of West Flank Fireline (Zero Point) and follow draw below “Tree.” trail that drops off east side of ridge ona contour toward H-2. Time Firefighters Fire/Weather Source
Time Firefighters Fire/Weather Source 1612:15 Roth and Thrash start to deploy. West Flank Time: Putnam Fireline Group stop behind them. Scholz, about 80ft north of Zero Point, looks Fire on south side of Spur Ridge crests Main Scholz back to southwest and sees fire “curling” over Ridge 150to 200ft south of Zero Point. the ridge behind firefighter running down the trail toward him. 1612:30 Haugh crosses over Main Ridge attop ofHot air and radiant heat in area near topof Erickson, West Flank Fireline and starts down into the West Flank Fireline as fire crests the Spur Ridge. Haugh, Scholz, East Drainage. Haugh receives slight burns. Fires active on Main Ridge. Wind blowing Robertson toward H-2. Time: Putnam Blecha steps around West Flank Fireline Group Time: Putnam and continues up fireline. 1612:45 Erickson crosses over the Main Ridge atthe topof the fireline and receives second degree burns. 1613 Doehring reaches H-2, heads into East Drainage. Smoke and sparks inair. Doehring Time: Putnam Archuleta and Robertson walk on Main Ridge Hot air or radiant heat, smoke and sparks on Robertson trail near Photo Point and feel heat. topof Main Ridge. Time: Putnam Shepard, Blanco, Browning, Tyler move red bags Shepard near H-2. 1613:15 Scholz approaches H-2 from trail on east side Dolmars on Main Ridge between Photo Point Scholz of Main Ridge. andH-2 explode. 1613:30 Ryerson feels heat atH-2. Saws and dolmars Ryerson left near red bags. Byers Robertson Fire overruns and kills 12 members of West Fire, hot gases and smoke at bottom of Time: Putnam Flank Fireline Group (200to 280ft down West fatality site. Flank Fireline from Zero Point). Tyler, Browning run north ofH-2 along Main Ridge. 1613:45 Blecha caught byhot gases/flames. He dies Time: Putnam 121ft from topof Main Ridge. 1614 Blast ofhot air hits Hipke, he hits ground 15ft Hot air, flames, and smoke on Main Ridge Hipke west of Zero Point. Hipke gets up, removes pack between H-1and Zero Point. Time: Putnam ashe crosses east edge of Main Ridge and headed down into East Drainage. Hipke receives third degree burns over 10 percent ofhis body. Main Ridge Group, BLM/USFS, Smokejumpers Heat pushes firefighters over edge of Main Ridge. Ryerson, heading off Main Ridge into East Drainage. Scholz, Byers, Good 1614:30 Last of Main Ridge Group below red bags head Smoke, hot air, sparks atH-2and onred gear Robertson farther into East Drainage. bags. Fusees with gear ignite. Scholz Shepard Time: Putnam 1615 BLM/USFS, Main Ridge Group, Smokejumpers Flames near topof Main Ridge atH-2. Fire Navarro, several hundred feet down East Drainage. advances through saddle below Drop Zone Scholz, Byers, Two helitack crewman cut off from East Drainage. and into topof East Drainage. Dolmars Ryerson (probably near red bags) explode. Time: Putnam Turbulence and smoke force helicopter to leave. Good 1618 Sixof eight jumpers hiking up ridge reached Time: Putnam burned area on Lunch Spot Ridge below H-1.
Time Firefighters Fire/Weather Source 1619 Eight smokejumpers on Lunch Spot Ridge Petrilli deploy fire shelters. They form two groups, six approximately 230ft below edge ofH-1, two others about 100ft further down ridge. Jumpers call Mackey and get no response. 1622:30Two Helitack (Tyler and Browning) overrun and Fire advances to draw below rock outcrop Time: Putnam are killed in tight draw (1,960ft northwest ofH-2). northwest ofH-2. 1624 All eight smokejumpers under shelters. Petrilli During next 45 minutes the fire makes three runs Petrilli checks his watch. toward upper endof Double Draws approximately 500ft south of eight smokejumpers. 1715- Main Ridge Group, BLM/USFS, Smokejumpers Firefighters moving down East Drainage, see Scholz 1730 reach I-70 freeway. spot fires in East Drainage. Haugh 1800 Main Ridge Group, BLM/USFS, Smokejumpers Fire burns to mouth of East Drainage. SCRon freeway taken to Glenwood Springs. Archuleta returns to helibase at Canyon Creek Estates. Longanecker hiked to Lunch Spot Ridge Fire burns through entire West Flank, but Petrilli deployment site. Smokejumpers outof shelters, area between Lunch Spot Ridge andH-2is cool they spread out, some walk to West Flank enough to walk through. Fireline fatality site and begin search and rescue. 1900- Smokejumpers from Lunch Spot Ridge deployment Petrilli 2000 site arrive atH-2. Archuleta and25 or26 smoke- Little jumpers are ferried inby helicopter to continue search and rescue. Smokejumpers from shelter deployment on Lunch Spot Ridge ferried from fire. Smokejumpers conducting search walk out West Drainage after dark. 2100 Fire activity diminishes. Fire estimated to have burned 2,000 acres. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - July 11 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Fire is declared controlled. Total burned area is2,115 acres. Russo and Williams 1995, SCR Distances Table B-2—Measured distances along West Flank Fireline from Zero Point. Feet Description 0 Zero Point: Junction of Main Ridge and top of West Flank Fireline 15 Hipke’s shelter 82 Hipke’s pulaski, no handle 121 Firefighter fatality nearest topof Fireline (Blecha) 142 Bent handle shovel, handle charred 200 Tree and upper endof fatality site 240 Middle of fatality site 283 Lower endof fatality site 392 Pulaski head, no handle 445 Location of narrow Draw where Hipke passed Thrash and Roth 580 Firefighters shown in photos taken by Archuleta and Doehring from Photo Point 680 Top of Spur Ridge 850 Stump and felled tree 1,450 Smokejumper (Hipke) starting point for hike back line toward Main Ridge 1,665 Location of midpoint of Prineville crew prior to order toget out1,880 Location ofend of Prineville Hotshot crew prior to order toget out, fireline to south leads uphill to Lunch Spot 2,100 Lunch Spot
Location Description Location Description feet feet 400 Zero Point (topof West Flank 1,940* Base of Double Draws (origin Fireline at Main Ridge) toof blowup) to Erickson’s spot turnaround at Rocks on Main fire. Ridge below H-1. 790 Zero Point to center ofH-1. 815* Base of Double Draws to bench under West Flank Fireline. 60 Zero Point to “Y”. 650* Bench under West Flank Fireline to Hipke’s start point (1,450ft) for hike out. 110 Zero Point to Main Ridge Photo 900* Hipke’s start point (1,450ft) to Rocks Point. under H-1 (straight uphill). 560 Zero Point toH-2. 2,040* Erickson’s spot fire to Helitack fatality site. 1,148 Zero Point to fire edge on West 600 Hipke’s start point to Stump. bench shown infig. 29a. 1,195* Zero Point to spot fire seen by975* Stump to Main Ridge (straight uphill). Erickson. 2,640* Lunch Spot toI-70by wayof 120H-2 north tored bags. West Drainage. 630 Lunch Spot to Petrilli’s Photo 270H-2 north to Shepard lookout position Point near Double Draws. on knob. 984 Lunch Spot to Longanecker’s790 H-2 north to Saddle. position in Double Draws. 775 Lunch Spot to lower two jumper 925H-2to bottom of jumper Drop Zone. deployment sites below H-1. 970 Lunch Spot to upper six jumper 1,960H-2to Helitack fatality site. deployment sites below H-1. 1,200 Lunch Spot to edge ofH-1. 400* Erickson’s spot fire to base of Spur Ridge. 1,225 Lunch Spot toH-1 center. 876* Bottom of main fatality site to base of Spur Ridge. * Measurements estimated from map. Firefighter Travel Rates Firefighter travel times were estimated intwo ways. Table B-4 presents actual travel rates for two physiologically different adult males (J. Cohen andT. Putnam). Their times probably bracket the actual transit times ofthe West Flank Fireline Group. We also reenacted the firefighter travel times for other routes (tables B-5 through B-7). Allof these other rates were reenacted by Putnam except for the time between the Longanecker position inthe Double Draws tothe Lunch Spot, which was reenacted by Butler. Table B-4 presents the transit times onthe West Flank Fireline. This isthe route followed bythe smokejumpers and the first half ofthe Prineville Hotshots as they traveled along the West Flank Fireline from the Lunch Spot tothe topof the line atthe Main Ridge (the Zero Point). Table B-5 presents reenacted travel times and rates for the BLM/U.S. Forest Service firefighters and the second half ofthe Prineville Hotshots who traveled from the intersection ofthe West Flank Fireline and the Main Ridge Fireline south toward H-1, turned around near the rocky outcropping below H-1 then back
rates for the smokejumpers inthe Double Draw area. They traveled from a point southwest ofthe Lunch Spot, tothe Lunch Spot, then upthe ridge to their deployment site. Table B-7 presents times, distances, and rates for the two helitack. Their path started atthe red bags, led north ofH-2 along the Main Ridge toward the Drop Zone, and then northwest into the narrow chutes onthe northeast side ofthe West Drainage. Table B-4—Reenacted travel rates on West Flank Fireline. Putnam Cohen Segment Elapsed Segment Elapsed Segment Location* distance time time Rate time time Rate Feet Ft/sFt/s Lunch Spot 00:000:00 Southernmost firefighters on fireline 2201:261:262.6 Hipke start point, northernmost 4302:411:155.70:000:00 members of group on fireline Stump 6004:572:164.42:302:304.0 Spur Ridge 1706:381:411.73:341:042.7580 ft (firefighters in Archuleta 1007:130:352.94:030:293.5 photo) Draw 1357:460:334.14:280:255.4 Bottom of fatality site 1628:521:062.55:140:463.5 Middle of fatality site 439:100:182.45:270:133.3 Tree 409:330:231.75:420:152.7 Blecha 7910:441:111.16:300:481.6 Zero Point 12111:320:482.57:000:304.0 Total from Hipke start point 1,4508:512.77:003.5to Zero Point *See table B-2for distances from Zero Point. Table B-5—Reenacted firefighter travel rates on Main Ridge. Segment Elapsed Segment Location distance time time Rate Feet Ft/s Zero Point 00:00 South from Zero Point to Rocks below H-1400 4:314:311.5 North from Rocks to Zero Point 4007:222:512.3 North from Zero Point to “Y” 607:37 :154.0 North from “Y” toH-2450 9:101:334.8 North from H-2to Red Bags 1209:31 :225.7 Total distance—South from Zero Point to1,4809:319:312.6 Rocks, then north from Rocks along Main Ridge toRed Bags
Table B-6—Reenacted smokejumper travel rates in Double Draw Area. Segment Elapsed Segment Location distance time time Rate Feet Ft/s Petrilli Photo Point 00:00 Petrilli Photo Point to100 ft below Lunch 5334:16* 4:162.1* Spot where jumpers met Mackey From jumper/Mackey meeting site to100 5:040:482.1 Lunch Spot From Lunch Spot up ridge to lower 77511:52* 6:481.9 deployment site - two smokejumpers From lower deployment site to upper 19213:341:421.9 deployment site - six smokejumpers Total distance from Petrilli Photo Point 1,60013:3413:422.0to upper deployment site Longanecker locations in Double Draws 9847:407:402.0to Lunch Spot * Estimated. Table B-7—Reenacted travel rates along Helitack route. Segment Elapsed Segment Location distance time time Rate Feet Ft/sRed Bags 00:00 North from red bags to south edge of150 1:001:002.5 knob directly north ofH-2 North from south side of knob to north 1801:550:553.3 side of knob North from knob to Saddle 3442:450:506.9 North from South edge of Drop Zone 1324:091:241.6 Edge of gulley where the helitack 7617:042:554.4 crew were found From edge of gulley to middle of site 2749:011:572.3 where the two helitack crewmembers died Total distance traveled by helitack crew 1,8419:019:013.4 from red bags to fatality site
Table B-8is a compilation of distances, times, and estimated fire spread rates. The rates were estimated by dividing the distance that the fire traveled bythe time that it took the firefighters to move from one point tothe next orby observations at estimated times for each specific event. Table B-8—Estimated fire spread rates. Elapsed Fire spread Fire movement Distance Time reference time rate Fire movement north up West Drainage (ft) (s) (ft/s) Double Draw - South endof West Bench. 815 Fire at base of Double Draws (1602) - 3002.7 Fire on West Bench (1607). South endof West Bench - 690 Fire on south endof West Bench (1607) - 2552.7 West Bench below Spur Ridge. Fire in Archuleta - Doehring photograph* (1611:15). Erickson Spot Fire - Helitack Site. 2,040 Erickson left Tree* (1611:15) - Helitack 6753.0 overrun (1622:30). ——————— 1,450ft Hipke start point - Stump 600 Hipke observation from Spur Ridge (1608:40) - 1105.5 (midslope position of series of hook Mackey at Spur Ridge (1610:30). north and run east). Fire movement from Bench to Main Ridge South endof West Bench - 1,735 Hipke observation from Stump (1607) - 1809.6 Rocks north ofH-1. Fire crested Main Ridge at Rocks (1610). Stump - Main Ridge at200 ft Main Ridge 975 Fire run heard (“fire roared”) (1610:30) - 1059.3 Spot Fire. Fire run photographed by Scholz observed fire curl on Main Archuleta and Doehring (time, 1611 - Ridge (1612:15). 1611:15). ——————— Fire on West Bench under Spur Ridge - 910 Fire in photograph (1611:15) - (1613:30). 1356.7 Middle of Fatality Site. Fire runin West Flank Fireline Group overrun. green oak. Middle Fatality Site - Zero Point. Fire run 240 Crew overrun (1613:30) - Hipke down 308.0in underburned oak. near Zero Point (1614). Fire on West Bench under Spur Ridge - 1,150 Fire in photograph (1611:15) - Hipke 1657.0 Zero Point (full run). down near Zero Point (1614). ——————— Erickson Spot Fire - Middle of Fatality Site. 955 Erickson left Tree (1611:15) - West Flank 1357.1 Fire runin grass and green oak. Fireline Group overrun (1613:30). Erickson Spot Fire - Zero Point (full run). 1,195 Erickson left Tree (1611:15) - Hipke down 1657.2 (1614). ——————— Erickson Spot Fire - H-2. 1,350 Erickson left Tree (1611:15) - fusees 1956.9 igniting atH-2 (1614:30). Spot Fire - Saddle below Drop Zone. 1,420 Erickson left Tree (1611:15) - Fire cut off 2256.3 helitack crew (1615). *1611:15is a critical time in many ofthe calculations of this table. The later photographs by Archuleta and Doehring were shot at about this time. Based on travel rate calculations, Erickson left the Tree at about this same time. Based on Erickson’s statements from his vantage point, the spot fire grew toward the north but not uphill before he left the Tree. Itis assumed that the main fire burning onthe north endof the Bench and the spot fire he observed began to spread uphill ashe left the Tree.
Because the wind wasso critical to this event, it sparked the interest of mesoscale meteorology modelers. Could such a wind be modeled, or even forecast bya high resolution mesoscale model? One interested group was the Mesoscale Meteorology Section atLos Alamos National Laboratory (in association with Crisis Forecasting Research being conducted bythe Ad- vanced Computing Laboratory). Figure C-1 presents predicted wind vectors 33 feet above the ground ina surface following coordinate system at approximately 1600 hours on July 6, 1994 (Bossert and others 1998). These predictions were made using a four-level nested grid ofthe RAMS (Pielke and others 1992) mesoscale model ata final grid resolution of33 feet using 100 foot elevation data. Model initialization was facilitated bya (MAPS) analysis provided bythe Forecasting Systems Laboratory, Boulder, CO. Figure C-1—Wind vectors from MAPS run. Heavy dashed line is approximate location of West Flank Fireline. X’sare approximate locations of helispots.
Figure C-2—Streamlines from MAPS run. Heavy dashed line is approximate location of West Flank Fireline. X’sare approximate locations of helispots. the high resolution simulation supports the25 to35 mile per hour winds blowing upcanyon inthe West Drainage and the 45to 50 mile per hour westerly winds blowing over H-1and the Saddle. The predictions support the other evidence suggesting less wind inthe area ofthe Double Draws and along the lower half ofthe West Flank Fireline. This is consistent with several witness statements (Scholz 1995; Hipke 1995). The streamlines shown in figure C-2 suggest that local areas of lower winds inthe vicinity ofthe lower portion ofthe West Flank Fireline are possible and provide an excellent visualization ofthe channeling ofair upthe West Drainage (Bossert and others 1998). The Los Alamos simulations support the mesoscale wind analysis by meteorologists onthe Accident Investigation Team (USDA, USDI, and USDC 1994).
Federal Recycling Program Printed on Recycled Paper You may order additional copies of this publication by sending your mailing information in label form through oneof the following media. Please specify the publication title and Research Paper number. Ogden Service Center Fort Collins Service Center Telephone (801) 625-5437 (970) 498-1719 FAX (801) 625-5129, Attn: Publications (970) 498-1660 E-mail pubs/rmrs_ogden@fs.fed.us rschneider/rmrs@fs.fed.usWeb site http://www.xmission.com/~rmrs http://www.xmission.com/~rmrs Mailing Address Publications Distribution Publications Distribution Rocky Mountain Research Station Rocky Mountain Research Station 324 25th Street 3825 E. Mulberry Street Ogden, UT 84401 Fort Collins, CO 80524 Butler, Bret W.; Bartlette, Roberta A.; Bradshaw, Larry S.; Cohen, Jack D.; Andrews, Patricia L.; Putnam, Ted; Mangan, Richard J. 1998. Fire behavior associated with the 1994 South Canyon Fire on Storm King Mountain, Colorado. Res. Pap. RMRS-RP-9. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 82p. Inthe aftermath ofthe deaths of14 firefighters during the South Canyon Fire in July 1994, fire scientists assessed what occurred and suggested guidelines that may help firefighters avert such a tragedy inthe future. This report describes the fuel, weather, and topographical factors that caused the transition from a relatively slow-spreading, low-intensity surface fire toa high- intensity, fast-spreading fire burning through the entire fuel complex, surface to crown. The analysis includes a detailed chronology of fire and firefighter movements, changes inthe environmental factors affecting the fire behavior, and crew travel rates and fire spread rates. Eight discussion points apply directly to firefighter safety. Keywords: wildland fire, rate of spread, fireline intensity, fire fighting, safety, accidents, fire size, firefighter travel rates.
ROCKY MOUNTAIN RESEARCH STATION RMRS The Rocky Mountain Research Station develops scientific informa- tion and technology to improve management, protection, and use ofthe forests and rangelands. Research is designed to meet the needs of National Forest managers, Federal and State agencies, public and private organizations, academic institutions, industry, and individuals. Studies accelerate solutions to problems involving ecosystems, range, forests, water, recreation, fire, resource inventory, land recla- mation, community sustainability, forest engineering technology, multiple use economics, wildlife and fish habitat, and forest insects and diseases. Studies are conducted cooperatively, and applications maybe found worldwide. Research Locations Flagstaff, Arizona Reno, Nevada Fort Collins, Colorado* Albuquerque, New Mexico Boise, Idaho Rapid City, South Dakota Moscow, Idaho Logan, Utah Bozeman, Montana Ogden, Utah Missoula, Montana Provo, Utah Lincoln, Nebraska Laramie, Wyoming *Station Headquarters, 240 West Prospect Road, Fort Collins, CO 80526 TheU.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination inall its programs and activities onthe basis of race, color, national origin, gender, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or familial status. (Not all prohibited bases apply toall programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA’s TARGET Center at202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). To file a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 202-720-5964 (voice orTDD). USDA isan equal opportu- nity provider and employer.
“Peace of mind, ifat all possible, can come only by accepting the fact that humans are part of nature, yet understand just parts ofit and master even less.”
