Bodträskfors, Norrbotten Read and learn from the accumulated experiences. Follow the progress, the frustration and the fight against the flames from day1. 10 votes from rescue workers, landowners, municipal management and volunteers. 2006-08-11–2006-09-08The largest forest fire in modern times Experiences for the future The fire dayby day Personal eyewitness accounts

With hindsight, wecan see that some choices may have made things worse. Others made changes for the better. They also received reinforcements from Sundsvall, Örnsköldsvik, Malå, Ånge, Skellefteå, Lycksele, Storuman, Finland, Södra Roslagen and the rescue service from F21. In total, approximately 750 man-days worked on extinguishing the fire. Catering: The kitchen atI19 was responsible for food for the rescue crew. A maximum of160 meals were served per shift atthe fire area and20 atthe fire station in Boden. Staffing: Rescue services from all the county's municipalities except Kiruna and Pajala came to help. was taken by fire. To some extent, luck, and sometimes bad luck, wason our side. Butto a large extent, wecan also learn from the efforts and choices that were made during the most critical days. (cid:127) 130–140 water jugs (cid:127) It took 4 trucks to transport all the material back. (cid:127) 150 jet tubes Material: rial. personal) Allof Sweden was talking about it. Everyone inthe area was shivering inthe middle ofthe deserted Norrbothnian summer. But few have understood the extent ofthe enormous forest fire that raged in Bodträskfors and the surrounding area atthe endof the summer of 2006. Apart from the forest owners who were forced to watch the heritage and work of several generations goup in smoke, and the house and cottage owners who were forced to flee their homes without knowing if anything would remain. Andof course everyone who toiled inthe summer heat to fight the fire and help with all the work that was required around. Area: 1900 hectares = 3000 football fields = several times larger than the town of Boden = takes two hours to drive around bycar. 2500 cubic meters of wood were cut along 16000 fire roads. (cid:127) 100 churches/branches (cid:127) 100 steel piassava brooms The rescue team has begun to recover. Eighty miles of hose are under cover. But the scars from the largest forest fire in modern times will remain for generations. Time: The fire raged for four weeks. (cid:127) 80km of hose wasin circulation, of which 3200 hose lengths of25 (cid:127) About 10 portable syringes In this document you can follow the progress ofthe fire and the efforts dayby day, as well as read personal interviews with some ofthe people who worked inand around the forest fire in Bodträskfors from August 11to September 8, 2006. (cid:127) 1 flood jetof 6000 liters/min (came from Finland with 24/7to transport food, personnel, refuel cars, etc. 30 people from the Home Guard helped, mainly with firefighting. meters were used. (Fora “normal” forest fire, about 40 hose lengths are used.) It required 180 days of work and about 100SJ pallets to take care of afterwards. (cid:127) 40 motor sprayers of 2000 liters/min (pulled bycar) Noone was seriously injured. No residential building Volunteers: The volunteer resource group hadup to30 people/ The smoke has cleared. Hot facts about Sweden's largest forest fire in modern times
Atthe same time, it blows andin the middle ofthe firefighters, patches of ground fires flare upin the1.5–2 meter high sleet and50–60 meters in front of them. The ground here is usually wet but not this summer. Ina very short time, the fire is uncontrollable. The rescue leader on site orders to save what canbe saved and for everyone toget outon the road. Everyone runs away from the fire and two firefighters get burned inthe face. Helicopter and Home Guard requested The helicopter is flying over the area and cannot see the road but continues to extinguish what is visible. Inthe afternoon, the fire is extensive and more resources are requested. Boden's full-time fire department goes out with two cars anda tracked vehicle. Gammelstad's rescue service is sent to Boden to look after the station. Boden's full-time night shift takes over from the day shift. At10 p.m. You are referred toATK in Uppsala. 30 Home Guardsmen arrive. Two cars leave from Boden with the front line taking over. An ambulance is called butno oneis seriously injured. They tryto stop the fire and call for more help. Hose and fittings are burning inside. RCB talks with ARCC in Gothenburg regarding the defense helicopters. At13.40I19 is contacted to request the Home Guard. The machine was left at1 amand no smoke was seen at that time. However, itis reported that the night staff atthe care center alerted SOS about smoke from Västbohållet at3 am, butat that time itwas believed that the smoke came from a previous forest fire in Odjursberg. The machines have already been moved once, but the fire spreads and the machine operators are caught and told where the keys are. The rescue personnel manage toget both the machines and the barracks to safety. The helicopter, which was also needed fora forest fire in Överkalix, will not take off until after 6p.m. At5:25p.m., the Home Guard reports a fire atthe top that cannot be extinguished with their equipment. Later inthe morning, another critical situation arises when two tractors anda barracks getin the way ofthe fire. Water and hose are requested anda rear command with a rescue chief on standby (RCB) is established in Boden. At3:25p.m., no helicopter has arrived and one is requested again. Five men arrive bycar. Then they start to have the fire under control, so while the first team goes fora coffee, the newcomers continue with the extinguishing work. When the water is turned on, it doesn't work onthe right side andit turns out that oneof the hoses has burned out. Everyone runs there to help. They start by changing outof their station clothes and summer shoes, and return home after a while of extinguishing the fire. The helicopter arrives just before 6:30p.m. but has problems and starts again an hour later. The helicopter reports that the fire path is well downwind and that there are 800–1,000 meters left tothe front. The ridge is extinguished bythe helicopter. At8 p.m. the helicopter leaves to refuel andis gone for just over 1 hour. During that time, the distance tothe front has reduced to400 meters. The extent ofthe fire is estimated tobe 2.4km long and 400 m wide. Gammelstad's rescue service is called inand arrives at3 p.m. A full-time firefighter from the area onhis wayto Boden inthe morning turns back and comes to help the Harads school children. Shortly after 7o'clock, the rescue team calls outto Boden again. After a whole night of fighting, they are tired and need help. Acar with a hose is then sent from Boden. When Svea Skog takes over the monitoring ofthe fire at Storklinten, which parts ofthe rescue team had left, the other two come from the force and there are now six people plus two volunteers in total. They pull the hose along both sides ofthe fire and check for backup so that the hose does not burn out. 08.57 Boden is pulled part-time and10.13 Initially, there are natural firebreaks. Itis decided to widen the firebreak at Klusåvägen and the harvester who was on site from the beginning is working on this. The fire dayby day Day 1, 2006-08-11 Friday At06.05the Boden Rescue Service receives an alarm about a forest fire in Bodträskfors. Five men from Harads' part-time fire brigade have been working toput out another forest fire just afew kilometres away all night and announce that Boden must take it. But three of them are sent asa rescue team and two stay to continue toput out the fire. They have to search fora while before they find where the fire isand start putting itout at seven o'clock with the equipment they have inthe rescue truck while waiting for Boden. The fire area is then about 300 metres long and50 metres wide and follows a forestry tractor road. Itis burning 30 metres behind a forestry machine and they get hold ofthe landowner and machine owner to have the machine moved. Rapid change
Day2, 2006-08-12 Saturday Day3, 2006-08-13 Sunday Early Sunday morning it looks like the firebreaks are having an effect. Another 150 meters and the entire fire will be surrounded. A breakpoint, fuel depot and communications point are being setup ina garage inthe village of Västbo during the morning. Approximately 20 people from the rescue services in Boden, Luleå, Råneå, Piteå and Älvsbyn are participating inthe extinguishing work with the help of15 home guards. At half past tenin the morning, the fire road is clear andis now only 40 meters from the fire. At11.08the helicopter, the Swedish Defence Force's Puma H98, arrives. During the morning the pump located at Bodträ-skån stops working while the fire rapidly moves closer and closer tothe boundary line and the buildings at5 m/sec. At11.35the fire is heading towards Västbo ata violent speed. At11.50it is determined that the fire is uncontrollable andan attempt is made to contact residents in Västbo to warn them. At05.50the situation is still considered stable. A full alarm is raised at Gunnarsbyn for relief. Jokkmokk is also being prepared fora response. At10.00 scattered islands are burning anda helicopter is requested again. It arrives at12.54. Just over an hour later itis announced that the helicopter's flight time is about toend. Logistics for fuel, water and lunch are arranged bythe rescue service'sown personnel shopping and ordering food delivery from restaurants. The extent ofthe fire increases in just afew hours to about 500ha. About 1000 haare restricted to prevent the fire from spreading. The wind blows and even more fires are discovered during the afternoon. Atthe same time, there isa fire in Muddus National Park where the rescue service in Porjus is sent. with water and can arrive atthe fire within eight minutes. At21:00the helicopter hasto depart to refuel andis gone again foran hour. Four major fires are discovered andit is described as “burning everywhere.” Anew crew is requested for the helicopter but they are told that anew helicopter may arrive earlier. Brandgata at8:21p.m. Saturday, August 12By this time, Harad's part-time force is completely exhausted and Vuollerim's part-time force will come to relieve him. At11:00p.m., the entire area is considered stable and the demarcation line holds.
The information manager and the rescue manager meet atthe station and discuss the situation. A press release is issued with information about the fire. The extent ofthe fire increases by several hundred hectares in just afew hours. Inthe afternoon, the municipality's information manager is contacted and told that itis abig deal and that something must be done. On Sunday afternoon, the fire quickly approaches the houses and evacuation is carried out. The first task will beto warn the residents of Kluså and prepare the school asa collection point for evacuees. The Volunteer Resource Group, FRG, is called inand arrives with nine people at2 p.m. A total of15 FRG members work during the day. Porjus fish flight and Kallax flight are requested to supplement the first helicopter. A local machine owner is working ona new fire road south of Västbo. The road onthe south side ofthe Lule River is closed and the public is advised notto visit the fire-ravaged area. The rescue team is requesting additional assistance from other rescue services inthe county and Västerbotten. Reinforcement inthe air and onthe ground The lottery tickets are requested for cooking supplies, but they are directed tothe kitchen atI19 and are told that the rescue service must arrange its own transport from Boden. FRG delivers the first food shipment. Practical issues arise, such as food for the rescue forces. The information department is called in. Shortly after 3p.m., evacuation of Västbo to Harads school begins. There, FRG receives and arranges refreshments. Forward command is established in Västbo. POSOM Evacuation ("mental and social care inthe event of accidents or disasters") is called in, ison site during the evening andis then on standby while two people from FRG remain atthe school all night. A total of40 people are evacuated from the villages of Västbo and Klusån.
Day4, 2006-08-14 Monday Day5, 2006-08-15 Tuesday No property in Björnudden has burned yet. Two helicopters are water bombing. Massive airstrike and passable road Onthe personnel side, reinforcements are coming from Råneå, Arvidsjaur, Gällivare, Skellefteå and Luleå, plus personnel from Boden and Harads. Älvsbyn's rescue service is also on site. There is also alot of pressure atthe roadblocks, which are guarded bythe FRG. The first press conference will be held at3:00PM. After 10p.m., a helicopter pilot reports a violent fire atthe lower boundary. The media drive ison. North: risk of crossing the fire road, water bombed, South: Calm, East: OK, Northwest: crisis that it will cross, houses threatened Klusåberget, Björnudden, Björkvik bombed, risk of properties being seton fire. Personnel are being prepared from Gällivare, Skellefteå and Råneå. The Puma takes offat 09.20. Buta Super Puma must be repaired and test flown before itcan be used. Another hasa problem with the basket and must goto Kallax. The two promised helicopters areat midnight in Sundsvall dueto fog and one has instrument problems. Both were supposed to arrive at10, butit is reduced toone helicopter, the time is moved upto 12but it does not arrive until after 13. The second helicopter will arrive at16. Work is underway toget more helicopters for tomorrow. Björnudden is being water-bombed during the afternoon, but there isa lotof smoke soit is difficult tosee where the water is going tobe released. 20men from Boden, Piteå, Luleå and Älvsbyn have a night shift in Bodträskfors. At04.30 open flames are visible tothe east above the buildings in Klusån. Flames are also breaking outin the southwest corner ofthe fire area. The helicopter takes out GPS points onthe smoke-covered fire road inthe north. During the night, Kallaxflyg supports the fire front. From Vuollerim, some elderly people are being evacuated from a nursing home in Vuollerim who are having trouble breathing dueto the smoke from Bodträskfors. The municipal management meets and decides notto convene the Crisis Management Committee andto make the matter an Extraordinary Event. Almost the entire area is surrounded bya road that canbe used with anoff- road vehicle, except inthe southwest corner where the situation is critical. Anoff-road vehicle is ordered and the rescue team is driving around the area. Other fires atthe same time: Norriån, Notsel, Messaure and Mud-dus. Monday morning the rescue chief will have a briefing with the municipal management. The situation is unclear and the extent ofthe fire is increasing. Top fire and punctures The fire-ravaged area isnow 800ha. Excavators anda bulldozer are continuing to work to delimit the area. At04.45the fire front inthe north is about 400m from the boundary line. The Skellefteå group goes there to guard the houses, and Beab is contacted to turn off the electricity. At3 pmthe wind is blowing towards Bodträskån and there is concern that the fire will jump the river. Atthe same time, a helicopter from West Helicopter ison its way to Västbo with apod and another helicopter is ordered from Kallax Flyg. Finnish personnel arrive but are forced to stay atthe station overnight. Assistance is also requested from Södra Roslagen. In total, about 60 people are working onthe extinguishing work. Arrangements are made for weather reports tobe faxed morning, lunch and afternoon from F21. Shortly after 7p.m., the Aeronautical Rescue Coordination Centre in Gothenburg (ARCC), which leads air rescue operations, announces that two helicopters from Linköping canbe upat midnight with a departure time of10 a.m. tomorrow. Puma H98 has run out of flight time, which means that the helicopters will have tobe relied on until Thursday. However, the Pumas will fly until 10p.m. FRGis manning the traffic posts. Hangars for material storage are being sought. At16:35, two helicopters, a superpuma, two Kallax aircraft, a Vest helicopter and another helicopter are working ina grid according tothe traffic control. The air operations are yielding results and the situation is back under control, butit is noted that more helicopters cannot fitin the airspace. At18:20, preparations for counterfire begin, but the operation is called off when the wind changes and the risk is deemed too great. Finland is contacted for assistance with personnel. Muddus (100ha) More staff onthe way After the press releases were issued, media interest inthe fire increased significantly. The rescue chief was called. At10:38p.m. the status report reads: Lövånger part-time fire brigade arrives. Fiskflyg and Kallaxflyg are deployed in separate directions. At midday, the fire is50 m from the southern fire road. More FRG personnel are requested. Västbogatan is widened with a bulldozer. Shortly after 2p.m., two forces, a tanker truck anda helicopter are requested and protective burning is discussed. The need for hose in various dimensions and other materials is great. 11.36it starts to reach the peaks inthe southwest corner. Fiskflyg water bombs. The road between Bodträskfors and Klusån causes many punctures and has tobe repaired. word that one helicopter can leave atthe earliest tomorrow morning and that helicopter number two can arrive atthe earliest tomorrow afternoon. At9 p.m. the fire is breaking through at Stora Kluså mountain with a risk to properties. The Swedish Rescue Service arrives in Boden andis updated onthe situation. The rescue chief goes up with the Swedish Rescue Service ina helicopter to survey the fire area. Help from above FRG will have a minibus atits disposal to transport personnel, food, etc. A total of24 people work from FRG. During the day, two helicopters from the defense arrive.
Day7, 2006-08-17 Thursday Day6, 2006-08-16 Wednesday Inthe evening, a helicopter, a puma and three private helicopters arein the air. At midnight the situation is calm, 28men are working, work onthe boundary lines is progressing andis expected tobe completed by morning. The wind is calm. The municipality's information manager is called home from a conference in Överkalix. On Tuesday evening, the municipality sets upa media number where all journalists can get direct contact with people who are only responsible for information questions about the fire, which means a great relief for the rescue manager. The only problem is that the number has not been tested at night and that forwarding toa mobile phone isnot possible. At5:00p.m., itis decided to reduce the helicopter force and from Friday onwards have one helicopter from 6a.m., two helicopters from 10a.m. to4 p.m. and one helicopter from 4p.m. to11 p.m., and another helicopter all day. The Home Guard will begin disarming after Friday. Itis also decided to reopen to residents from Friday. Forestry machinery begins clearing fire roads so that the value ofthe forest is preserved. arrive. FRG has 27 people working. Södra Roslagen arrives andis assigned to build a water system. 02.10–03.10 Rescue leaders and task force commanders reconnoiter parts ofthe area bycar. At03.30a helicopter goes upto search the area. Three more helicopters goup just after 4to water bomb. The critical thing right nowis the upper part before the demarcation line is completely clear. This means that noone is allowed to work further into the area than 50 meters. The fallen trees also cause problems with the electricity. About 20 poles have been blown down andin several places there are trees over the lines. Two military helicopters (Yngve 71) arrive and air traffic controllers from the defense take over helicopter coordination. The lines seem tobe working but they want a contact route via radio tothe rescue controller. The air traffic controller obtains anair radio which is picked upby helicopter and closed airspace is requested. Norrtälje and Storuman rescue services offer to come and help. People from FRG are serving all around. On Thursday evening, five helicopters are flying atall times. Four forces are working from each side. When the helicopters were deployed at full strength, ithad an effect. The governor visits the station. A prayer service in Harads church is scheduled tobe held at6 p.m., with both the rescue chief and the municipal councilor participating. Afew blessed raindrops will arrive as early as5:15p.m. and increase in strength. 00.50a Finnish newspaper wants information. The team gets a short briefing but the reporter wants tosee the fire and the group turns outto be under the influence of alcohol. After the recruitment round, three priority areas are identified, of which Norra Klusåberget is number one. 31 firefighters arrive from Ånge, Harads, Gällivare, Arvidsjaur, Råneå, S.Roslagen and Luleå during the morning. A telecommunications technician manages to resolve the forwarding ofthe media number and the number is forwarded toan emergency mobile. Media management is being sharpened There isnow a demarcated area of 3000 ha with firebreaks tothe north, west and south and the fire is starting tobe under control. The extent ofthe fire is estimated at around 1500 ha. The southwest corner is covered in smoke, nothing canbe done there via helicopter. Muddus: Two helicopters water bombed during the day and the situation was brought under control. Surveillance was ongoing during the night with two men. The transport route was closed to tourists, etc. Total fire area about 300 hectares. Other fires: Varjisträsk, Pouttaure, Aspberget/Vuollerim (waterbombed by helicopter from the Bodträskfors fire). Air traffic control from the Armed Forces FRGis guarding the roadblocks so that no press enters the fire scene. More help from above and from the south At04:00, water bombing begins with two helicopters from Kallaxflyg and one from Fiskflyg. At06:00, water bombing by military aircraft begins. There are smoldering fires, but otherwise the situation is calm. Ithas burned all the wayto Bodträskån, but the risk of spreading is over and the fire is being extinguished from the outside in. The biggest danger nowis falling trees where the roots have burned off. Minister of Infrastructure Ulrica Messing visits the area and participates ina press conference in Bodträskfors at1 p.m. She speaks with forest owners and raises the discussion about compensation land for those affected. At4:50a.m., four helicopters arein the air. At11:40p.m. there are3 water systems through the area, a total of about 12 kilometers. About 70 people are currently working onthe fire onthe ground and21 Hallelujah!
A helicopter tour is being made to find out together with the Norra Skogsägarna whether there isany forest to save inthe area. Discussions are underway ata central level whether the area should become a nature reserve ornot. Ifit becomes a nature reserve, nothing will be done inthe area. Ifit does not become a nature reserve, there are areas inthe northeast corner that should be surrounded by fire roads. Water bombing is continuing in that area, in connection with Björnudden. The greatest risk is behind Klusåberget where the water bombing is concentrated to prevent it from starting to blow. There are some spot fires where there is only smoke andin some places there isan open flame. At6:39a.m. the helicopter reports that there is more smoke in area 3. Nature reserve ornot? The night patrols report that the night has been quiet with only minor fires. Smaller spot fires are visible inthe early morning. At6:15a.m. a helicopter and air traffic controllers arrive. Minister of Defense Leni Björklund will arrive inthe afternoon. The area will be cordoned off prior tothe visit. Trees are falling andit is dangerous tobe inthe area, and there is also a risk of material damage. Water bombing begins with spot fires atthe northern line in Sector 1. Roads leading into the area are closed tothe public with cones and tape during the afternoon. Rain and thunder areon the way and the helicopter is taking a break fora while during the afternoon. The Minister of Defense will Then a helicopter goes upfor water bombing in area 6. Fog and smoke in other areas mean that they have to interrupt, but they continue water bombing with two helicopters starting inthe middle ofthe day. Inthe evening, F21 arrives with 5men. At7:20p.m., smoke is reported tothe north and straight down towards Åbacka. After a helicopter flyover, itis assessed that no helicopter operations are needed during the evening. At4:00a.m., the first aerial reconnaissance ofthe dayis carried out, followed bya reconnaissance ofthe entire area bycar. Here isa spontaneous fountain. Itis difficult to assess the area dueto smoke haze. The fog lifts inthe middle ofthe day and reveals scattered smoldering fires throughout the area. The helicopter is directed tothe northeast area. There is quite alot of fire onthe edge of Klusåberget. The occasional mishap leads toa smile amidst all the misery. She lands at5:00PM andis briefed onthe situation. She talks tothe emergency services personnel, pilots, FRG and the affected forest owners. The forest fire brigade has decided to remain until Monday. The rescue service now has 14 cars, a quad bike anda demountable tank inthe area. The FRG has17 people working. Inthe evening, 21men are working to extinguish the area. Other fires: At9:58p.m., a major alarm goes offat the district heating plant, where four mengo. The evening helicopter tour shows a couple of small fires onthe west side of Klusåberget anda couple ofthe same kind at Åbacka. Four forces are working during the day. Örnsköldsvik and Sundsvall are going home. The residents are being allowed back to their homes. Where the fire has spread, trees are falling inall directions andit is life- threatening tobe inthe area. Day10, 2006-08-20 Sunday Day9, 2006-08-19 Saturday
Day12, 2006-08-22 Tuesday Day11, 2006-08-21 Monday Local machine operators are working on fire road improvement measures. At04.30 Kallaxflyg starts and waterbombs sector 4but is interrupted byfog and continues in sector 3. The fog also means that you cannot drive inthe area. During the night, a small fire was extinguished between Björkvik and Klusån. The organization from today will change to Boden full-time from 8:00PM, which will monitor the area during the night. On-duty rescue leaders areat the fire scene from 8:00AM to10:00PM. Just when you think the fire is under control, the wind suddenly changes and the fire shoots through the treetops. A group of firefighters are completely surrounded by smoke, can'tsee the road they'reon and don't know ifit's fire or just smoke in front of them. With the help ofa helicopter, they are guided out and everyone escapes unharmed. Salmon flight. A helicopter has engine problems and aborts. Decisions will be made about two helicopters Monday-Tuesday. A meeting with landowners and machinery owners is planned for the evening. Among other things, the need to clear the roads inthe fire area to reduce the risk of trees falling on personnel and vehicles will be discussed. Only then will cabin owners be allowed into their cabins. Day and evening itis water-bombed with Vertol and Kal - the roads in their areas of responsibility. The warning about the danger of falling trees still applies. At16.03, Kallaxflyg arrives, makes an overflight and then begins water bombing. 20men from F21, the Rescue Association of Eastern Norrbotten, Lycksele and Arjeplog arrive inthe morning. The first inspection round ofthe dayat 3a.m. shows alot of smoke around the creek inthe southern part and around the road, just above Västbo. There is also alot of smoke from the Björnudd intersection andup towards the bridge over Bodträskån and below the bridge at Klusåvägen andin the northwest corner between the turning points. There are serious fires intwo places. The fire has jumped over Bodträskån atthe bridge and there are extensive embers atthe foot of Klusåberget's eastern side. After the evening count bycar, occasional streaks of smoke are reported, a little more along the eastern side of Klusåberget and northwest of Björkvik. After today's work, the Finnish forces from Tornio will return home. A helicopter goes upand bombs sector 5/6 until 8:30p.m. Other fires: At09.55the helicopter leaves the area and goes upto Haparanda to search fora new fire site there. Two helicopters are requested and operate during the day. The fire brigades are now tasked with extinguishing the fire offensively from
Day13, 2006-08-23 Wednesday Day17, Sunday, August 27, 2006 Day16, 2006-08-26 Saturday Day15, 2006-08-25 Friday Day14, 2006-08-24 Thursday Day18, 2006-08-28 Monday Calm night with afew small fires. At6:00a.m. two helicopters from Kallaxflyg start their water bombing. going there inone ofhis cars. During the afternoon, all areas calm down. Inthe evening, itis the same calm situation asin the morning and Kallaxflyg's helicopters are praised for the day's work. Two fires have re-emerged along Bodträskån and are being handled by helicopter, which is otherwise working onthe northeast and northwest sides ofthe fire area. At6:50p.m., Boden's full-time team goes to Klusån. A neighbor ofthe control center has found a cache of gasoline about 400m south ofthe control center. A police report is being made and the milk jugs with gasoline are photographed on site and then taken tothe control center. Two helicopters are operating during the day and are doing a good job. Anew water system is being started upon anew fire road northeast of Stora Klusåberget. In addition, the Piteå fire brigade ends upin the wrong fire street with its hose deployment. The hose is left in place and the Piteå fire brigade is moved tothe correct fire street, inthe southern part ofthe fire area, northwest of Västbo. Other fires: 200-300 square meters burning at Junkerträsket. The small helicopter is moving and Älvsbyn is being sent outto it. about. Shortly before 12 noon, Gunnarsbyn reports a larger fire along the road upto Björnudden. Oneof the helicopters is directed there. At09:00a briefing is held with the forest owners. They are starting to tree-safe Klusåvägen anda machine has started the fire road above Björkvik. The night has been calm butin the morning the fog is thick. The morning starts calmly. There are only afew places with moderate smoke. Two firefighters from Gunnarsbyn and two from Piteå are participating inthe airstrike. Two helicopters have been working on water bombing since the morning. Just before nine, all the assembled forces are out in their sectors. At10:00in square 45-25on the map, there isan open fire atthe new fire road that has been built inthe northeast corner ofthe fire area. Smoke from small fires canbe seen onthe west side ofthe fire road. These areas are being treated by helicopters The fires are flaring up again. At6:30p.m., Boden's full-time (4men) will arrive at Bodträskfors and part-time atthe station. Boden's full-time staff geta tour ofthe area when they arrive and get an overview ofthe situation. They then take the tracked vehicle and drive onto the southern fire road and continue where F21 and Storuman end. Telia comes and receives information about where there are downed telephone poles, but cannot enter that area now. 15.00one helicopter reports a fire under a power line north of Klusåvägen and wants help from ground troops. F21 The helicopters operate all day. A helicopter drops the pod. Harads is tasked with finding itand only finds itat 9:30p.m. Shortly before 9p.m., F21 and Storuman leave the scene, leaving Lycksele, Harads and Boden full-time. At9:30p.m., Kallaxflyg ends for the day. At9:00PM the helicopters land. When evening comes, there are only small fires in scattered places inthe fire area. Onthe northwest side ofthe fire area, there area number of fire centers that are being treated by helicopter. The area closest to Västbo after the southern fire road is also being water-bombed. taking care of this together with a helicopter. Inthe afternoon, small fires burn again in several places. After 3p.m. Harad's emergency group will come to support the others. There will bea total of20 men. The Puma from the defense will also come. Towards morning, the intensity ofthe fires increases. At09.20a helicopter goes upand rakes. The forces are then regrouped. There isa lotof spot fires atthe eastern turning point and eastwards, at Klusåberget and also the mountainside eastwards towards the intended fire route. Lycksele and Storuman have tracked vehicles and are entering that area. F21 goes inand checks Snöselet. Kallaxflyg is working inthe north, and when the second helicopter arrives at12 noon it starts at Snöselet and extinguishes the fire south of Bodträskån. Small fires inthe northeast and northwest, otherwise calm. Helicopters report intense fire Several fires are increasing both inthe north and south and are discovered at12 o'clock. The fire inthe north is taken care ofby the helicopter and Lycksele, while Storuman takes the tracked vehicle and travels together with F21 and takes care ofthe fire inthe south, west ofthe new fire road. Misfortune During the evening, work is underway to extinguish the fire in several areas. A helicopter is extinguishing the fire in Snöselet, where there is heavy smoke around the shoreline, and F21 is fighting north ofthe bridge. Inthe south, the second F21 team is fighting the fire atthe new fire road together with Storuman. At9:35p.m. the helicopters land for the evening. At10:00p.m. the rescue leader returns tothe station in Boden. I19 informs that they are withdrawing the fuel that the repository hasso far provided for the flight, and that the civilians will now have to solve it themselves. Civilian helicopters continue to work.
Two forces during the day, one force at night. The landowners are being prepared to take over post-surveillance. Helicopter tracking shows a calm fire area. Butin the afternoon, water bombing by helicopter takes place for about two hours. All three groups report that the situation is calm bythe endof the day. Inthe evening the helicopter discovers some new fires. The helicopter goes upand tries toput out two fires at Klusån just above Västbo. The other guys goto their areas and take care of their new fires. Inthe afternoon there are only occasional columns of smoke inthe area. Personnel and flights are being arranged for the coming days. When the fog has lifted, one from each group follows the helicopter upto see their area from the air. There isa little smoldering everywhere. Storuman, Malå and Lycksele help each other outin different parts ofthe area. The County Administrative Board follows up with the helicopter. Kallaxflyg will be used 3 hours/day from Wednesday. We have the right touse them more if needed. The rescue leader on site keeps track of flight times. 8.00 three forces arrive – Piteå 6 people atthe southern fire road, Ö.Norrbotten 4 people inthe middle area and5 from Jokkmokk take the northern fire road. The hose pulling inthe northeastern corner is reinforced and the ground area is extinguished. At08:30 three groups arrive, each taking their own area. Itis very foggy sowe cannot fly yet. Itis decided to continue as before with two forces during the day and one force at night, as well asa helicopter until Wednesday. Afew small fires here and there. Piteå takes care of3. Råneå pulls hoses tothe south. The helicopter is sent to bomb for about 1 hour inthe forest above Björnudden. The helicopter flies around personnel from Sveaskog. The night crew has rolled up2 kmof 110 hose and has also tried toget tothe fire source south ofthe bridge, butit was difficult terrain and dangerously dark soit is handed over tothe day crew. The helicopter is also a good tool for getting an overview ofthe area and the fire. along the road towards the turning area at Björnudden. Two helicopters are bombing spot fires. Fog all morning butno rain. Smoke pillars everywhere as before. The next flight will find some new small fires after the southern line. Storuman will take care of them. At3:30p.m. the helicopter is left for service and returns the next day. Lycksele and Storuman announce that they can come in with forces Saturday- Monday. Two groups from Storuman are working inthe southern and northern corners. onthe north/northeast side. Piteå splits upand some take a portable sprayer totry toget south ofthe bridge and extinguish there. The helicopter has been bombing with water for several days without success. Nowit only smolders inthe ground. The Northern Forest Owners fly along to form an opinion. At09:00, three forces are sent out – Piteå inthe south, Ö.Norrbotten inthe north and Jokkmokk inthe middle area. There isa report that there isa fire inthe forest bythe wooden silo in Klusån. The helicopter goes there and water bombs. There wasa lotof fire butit was easy toget to. Calm, just a small fire inthe clearing. There isa small fire atthe fire roads inthe northeast and south, as well asat Björnudden. Itis decided to cease forest firefighting operations atthe fire in Bodträskfors. I19 announces that they are filling upthe farm tanks with diesel/gasoline but are not leaving the aviation fuel behind andno personnel are present. The night is calm. You see some smoke andgo inand flush in some places. An unauthorized quad bike with two people onit was found inthe area and quickly sped away. The continued extinguishing and monitoring is being discussed. They still don't dare to release responsibility tothe landowners, there are too many small fires and columns of smoke inthe area andno rain has come. Lycksele is working south ofthe bridge. Aerial footage inthe middle ofthe day shows that it looks calm. The helicopter is water bombing the edges. Piteå extinguishes inthe northwest, Harads around Björnudden and F21 Inthe afternoon, an elderly couple is found living ina cabin at Björnudden. They have planned to hunt moose. The hunting area is within the boundaries and the couple is evicted from the area. Day24, 2006-09-03 Sunday Day21, 2006-08-31 Thursday Day26, Tuesday, September 5, 2006 Day22, 2006-09-01 Friday Day23, 2006-09-02 Saturday Day25, 2006-09-04 Monday Day20, 2006-08-30 Wednesday
Day28, 2006-09-07 Thursday Day29, 2006-09-08 Friday Day27, 2006-09-06 Wednesday 08.15 Luleå and Piteå arrive. Allis calm atthe air traffic control. Two new smoke plumes are rising inthe northeast corner. They will be knocked down with the remaining flight time ofthe day. The fire's progress leaves behind a fire-ravaged area the size of3,000 football fields... Three or four small columns of smoke inthe area inthe afternoon, otherwise very calm. Material transport from the area. The transports will continue for three weeks and will be carried outby Boden's rescue service and Harads' part-time fire brigade. The helicopter waterbombs the edges. The FRG and the helicopter will be dismantled inthe evening. Two personnel will stay on Thursday night to guard the material. Very quiet inthe area inthe evening. Inthe afternoon there are small fires against some boundary lines. Inthe afternoon, the helicopter takes care ofa column of smoke onthe east side of Klusåberget. There is smoke from two areas – Björnudden up towards the mountain which Piteå will take care of, and above Västbo inthe marsh where Råneå started yesterday. Luleå continues there. The day ends with Piteå and Råneå helping each other tolay anew water pipe. Landowner takeover completed on Friday at4:00PM. At8:00PM it's pouring rain!!! Where Råneå is located, the terrain is very poor and impassable.
A hunting lodge anda cabin inthe area had the flames practically licking at them. But for some inexplicable reason, the fire has stopped 30cm from the wall and the buildings have remained undamaged. But the toilet next door isa pile of soot. A Finnish photographer, overexcited, managed toget into the area andis said to have risked his life toget some real action shots. After a flight down from a tanker truck followed byan unprintable rant in Finnish, hewas abducted from the area. Harads School's property, Björnudden, was burned down several times during the fire's progress, butit remains there to this day without any major damage toany ofthe buildings. Amidst the human tragedy that the fire meant for the landowners and the gray, sooty lunar landscape that it left behind, one can still find the occasional glimmer of light in retrospect. Some comical stories, guardian angels where things could have gone really badly, a house with nine lives and much more… From an ecological point of view, the fire could provide interesting flora and fauna inthe future andin turn attract anew group of visitors tothe area. Already this autumn, a professor from Lund has been inthe area for ten days to study the people and the forest inthe area. And foreign campers inthe middle ofthe lunar landscape hadto be turned away from the area. ATV reporter commented onone ofthe local interviewees' slow speaking style, and was met with the broadest possible response: "Well, then you can make the broadcast longer." Heard and happened during the fire
Good preparedness but insufficient resources in Norrbotten Bengt Nilsson, Boden Rescue Chief – We basically emptied every single fire station inthe entire county. Our own staff only lasted for two or three days, then they came from Fyrkanten (Luleå, Piteå and Älvsbyn) and Östra Norrbotten. We have helped each other before within Fyrkanten, but never to this extent, he says. – Wehad two military helicopters already on Friday, but that was too few. Previously, we have had50 helicopters 100 meters from here. We have had many discussions about it with the ministers who have promised to look over the resources in this part ofthe country, says Bengt Nilsson. But when it gets this big, Norrbotten doesn't have enough resources. The biggest shortcoming isthe lack of helicopters. – We have a collaboration agreement within the square and always put Boden, Luleå and Piteå with rescue leaders mainly from Boden inthe front line, explains Bengt Nilsson. The garage chosen served asa base for food, rest, management, personnel changes and refueling and was the starting point for most ofthe operation. – Forus, it simply meant that we could handle this for30 days, says Bengt Nilsson. Fire stations from many parts ofthe country gotin touch and offered invaluable help to relieve those struggling against the flames. He thinks that the defense helicopters were slow to arrive. In retrospect, he also believes that if they had anticipated the onslaught of media that would ensue, the press number and the telephone numbers for this would have been setup earlier. Rescue chief Bengt Nilsson hada sweaty endto his vacation, tosay the least, with the task of extinguishing Sweden's largest forest fire ofall time onhis shoulders. This wasat the same time that 450 hectares of forest burned in Muddus, which also belongs tohis area. Then a base was established which turned outto bea stroke of luck. The overall tactic wasto build upthe water supply and contain the fire with firebreaks. A containment line was forced bythe fire and the first assembly point hadto be evacuated quickly. There was particular concern for vehicles parked there. Boundary lines and base management atthe station in Boden. Boden's rescue chief had the overall responsibility and took Luleå's rescue chief to help with staff recruitment inthe back office. With hindsight, Bengt Nilsson notes that Boden's Rescue Service was and is well prepared for forest fires. Useful experiences A front line was built on site anda rear
Sharp position instead of first exercise Marita Nilsson Vennberg, FRG She is also very impressed byhow the people of Bodensee and the villagers came forward with help and materials, and businesses sent extra things inthe wayof food to support the work. During the first six days, FRG personnel worked in three shifts around the clock. Every day, there was one person from FRGto coordinate resources inthe rear headquarters atthe station in Boden, while one person took notes for the rescue service logbook inthe front headquarters. Three shifts – Itwas worth its weight in gold to have access tothe kitchen. I basically had direct access tothe pantry. The girls were absolutely fantastic at volunteering and were able to arrange that little extra for those who were working, like biscuits, chocolate, fruit and more. had greatly benefited from having built upa good group feeling before they got their first assignment. The members had met once a month and discussed how they wanted to work and organize themselves and did things together. FRG carried this out and received around 40 people. On Sunday, August 13, two days after the fire broke out, rescue leader Kaj Nyström FRG Boden contacted Marita Nilsson Vennberg. Nine FRG members were quickly dispatched and their first task wasto inform residents inthe fire area ofa possible evacuation. Butin a short time the fire spread rapidly and before the information mission could begin, an immediate evacuation was decided. Other personnel from the FRG provided all conceivable services atthe fire site, atthe base andto some extent also atthe station in Boden. This included everything from transporting food, personnel, materials, arranging drinking water inthe heat, serving food and coffee, arranging Panadol and even arranging snuff for stranded firefighters. “We were supposed todo an exercise, butit turned outto bea baptism of fire,” says Marita Nilsson Vennberg, from the Volunteer Resource Group, FRG. The group had recently been formed in Boden, but instead ofa first exercise, they ended upin the middle of working onthe largest forest fire in modern times. “You could ask for almost anything and get it,” she says. Marita Nilsson Vennberg notes that the FRG in Boden using the phone much earlier. During the30 days that the fire wasat its worst, alot of personnel were required. In addition to23 of26 from the FRG in Boden, FRGs from Luleå, Älvsbyn and Kalix also participated. Inthe most critical situation, there were 20–25 people per day from the FRG, then three per day. atthe collection point at Harads school. – It felt like everyone was involved and that wehad talked to each other beforehand. Many question marks were cleared upand nowwe saw the importance ofFRG, says Marita Nilsson Vennberg. Marita Nilsson Vennberg initially hadto take all food orders and questions tothe kitchen viaVB, but after a while he handed over direct contact tothe kitchen. She also saw that the rescue chief had needed to relieve Food storage wasa comprehensive issue that involved transporting a maximum of160 portions three times aday, FRG was also responsible for transporting personnel and vehicles between Boden, the airport and the fire area and after afew days received two minibuses atits disposal. With hindsight, Marita Nilsson Vennberg believes that such vehicles, proposed bythe municipality, tobe used byFRG in crisis situations, should be available more quickly so that people donot have to drive private vehicles into a crisis area, in this case on very bad roads. plus evening coffee, from the kitchen onI19 tothe fire scene seventy miles away (one way), andup to20 portions tothe station. Planning food and transportation
Home Guardsmen on site after an hour Jörgen Lundgren, head ofthe Boden Home Guard Battalion Jörgen Lundgren thinks that the collaboration with the Rescue Service went very well. However, in retrospect, ithas been discussed that the management team should also include a representative from the Home Guard, to improve communication. – Nowwe made sure that Iwas atthe briefing every morning and after that Iwas outin the field working, explains Jörgen Lundgren. home guard battalion, says Jörgen Lundgren, head ofBo-den's home guard battalion. The Home Guard was called into the fire atan early stage, onthe first day. They requested 20men. An hour later, more than 20men were there, equipped fora forest fire. During the first weekend, Boden's home guard personnel were enough. – We brought in people from both Boden and later also Luleås sonal, but then they also hadto bring in from Luleå. From the Home Guard, around 30men participated per day throughout the first week. – Normally, we come with our hands and feet, but the more we know in advance about what is involved, the better wecan adapt. We have alot of material and equipment within the Home Guard, says Jörgen Lundgren. He acted asa liaison between the Home Guard and the Rescue Service and led the Home Guard groups throughout the first week. The Home Guard worked mainly on firefighting and had around 30men working every day. Asfor everyone else involved, this was the largest assignment they have hadin modern times, but the Home Guard has previous experience of extinguishing forest fires. He also says that if they had known how big it would be, the Home Guard would have been able to contribute more material, cooking gas, vehicles, etc. from the beginning.
Harvested and lost forests Jens Enberg, land and machinery owner – On Sunday evening itwas really close. Ten men from Boden were standing there watering the yard at home, says Jens Enberg. against the wind sothe smoke was straight on, says Jens Enberg. – Itwas terribly smoky working there. Wehad to work His wife and daughter were notat home, and Jens Enberg took the computer with the company's accounting with him and went tothe family's cottage onthe other side ofthe Lule River. – Itwas tragic. Jens Enberg first helped asa volunteer by cutting with a chainsaw all night into Saturday and all Saturday when the harvester that wasin the area initially started with the fire streets. Jens Enberg isa landowner inthe area and lives inone ofthe villages that were evacuated. Heis also a contractor in forestry machinery andon Sunday offered to bring his machine tothe fire area. Itwas towed there and Jens Enberg's machine then ran basically around the clock until the fire streets and boundary lines were finished on Wednesday. From the cabin they saw how the entire Klusåberget wasin flames onthe other side ofthe river andof course there was the thought that their house could catch fire. At times, itwas even mentally difficult tocut down forests that he himself had once planted. Orto fly over to navigate through fire streets and see his ancestors' and his own forests in ashes. Near the house During the ministerial visits tothe fire area, there was talk of providing replacement forest to landowners and turning the fire area into a nature reserve. Jens Enberg lost 270of his approximately 300 hectares of forest. New Forest On Sunday hewas at home fora while while another driver drove his machine. Then the decision was made to evacuate. In total, three private harvesters and one from Svea Skog, nine excavators and tracked tractors were at full speed to fight the fire and the clock. The work was coordinated by Norra Skogsägarna, who was in contact with the rescue team. The rescue team was sometimes also in direct contact with the machine operators. – Itwas a whale. We have never heard anything more since and none ofus landowners have been contacted. Butit isnot relevant for any ofus private forest owners here. We have hunting here and don't want any reserve bythe house. I will cut down everything on mine and plant new ones, says Jens Enberg decisively. Jens Enberg volunteered to help cut fire roads from Friday evening and drove oneof four harvesters that made fire lines from Sunday. Atthe same time, his family was evacuated from their home in Klusån and lost 270 hectares of forest tothe flames.
“ARCC slowed down” Kaj Nyström, rescue leader – But already on Monday evening I felt that this was going well. Then wehad wide, nice fire streets, says Kaj Nyström. Kaj Nyström was then informed that there were no helicopters available. He requested one again after 3p.m. When Kaj Nyström was called tothe Bodträskfors fire, he quickly realized that helicopter resources were needed. As early as1 p.m., he contacted ARCC in Gothenburg, which is responsible for the Swedish Armed Forces' air rescue. On Monday afternoon, itwas decided to carry outa protective burn. Experienced personnel were brought inand preparations began for the operation inthe evening. None of those involved had carried out such a large protective burn before, a total of three times four kilometers. But before the work could begin, the wind changed and the operation was called offas the risk was considered too great. “I felt like ARCC was slowing down,” says Kaj Nyström, who believes that helicopter resources are not requested if they are not really needed. Clarity and relief Andon Tuesday afternoon, when all the helicopters, at most seven, including two helicopters with larger water tanks, worked atthe same time asthe smaller ones that could work faster, ithad an effect. At3:55p.m., ATKin Stockholm, which is responsible for other defense resources, called. They questioned whether a helicopter was really necessary. Kaj Nyström worked asa rescue leader during the fire and was initially the rescue manager on standby. Hewas called at12:30on the first dayof the fire and was then involved inthe entire process. He experienced itas ARCC slowing down when requesting helicopter resources. He believes that this press release should always beup and running so that itcan be used as soon as something major happens. – The first two small helicopters from the defense didn't move. Itwas just like dabbing a little water. Isaw in front ofme those big "buckets" that exist, that was the size ofThe first helicopter ofthe Defence Forces did not arrive until half past sixin the evening, over five hours after itwas first requested. When the helicopters did arrive, there were initially some technical problems, short flight times, interruptions for refueling after a short period of work, andso on. This wasat the same time asthe fire was constantly increasing in strength. He also sees that alot of time was spent on press management inthe first few days and that the press release should have been put out on Sunday when they realized it would bebig. Kaj Nyström, like others who were involved inthe most hectic and critical days, has had time to think through what happened, what was done and what could have been done differently. What he sees asthe biggest obstacle was the problem of getting the helicopters. Buthe also points out that the Rescue Services must be very clear about what is needed. – We have a cost responsibility andwe should primarily use the state's resources before wego out and request civilian help. You are also forced to make an assessment ofhow much you can save in relation tothe costs, he explains. Protective burn planned Just afew days before, there was what was considered tobe a large fire of13–14 hectares, just afew kilometers from Bodträskfors. Inthe weeks before the large forest fire in Bodträskfors, there had been a number of smaller forest fires in Norrbotten. "I checked tosee ifwe could get one in Europe, but there were about a hundred fires in Spain and southern France, soit wasn't possible," says Kaj Nyström.
The help from above yielded results Kent Tuorema, Chief 1 Helicopter Squadron F21 Major Kent Tuoremaa, commander ofthe 1st Helicopter Squadron, F21, became involved inthe helicopter flotilla's response command onthe fifth dayof the fire. From the ground, he worked asthe response commander for the helicopters and their work onthe fire during the first two weeks ofthe fire. What was arrived at through coordination. Itwas solved by disseminating information, which did not have tobe released allat once, gradually during refueling. Coordination and communication The area was divided into eight smaller areas. The intention ofThe church's prayers for rain were all praise, but the most effective firefighting wasby helicopter once the helicopters were deployed at full strength. However, there wasa call fora flight coordination frequency that would work for both civilian and military helicopters. – Already upon arrival atthe operation area, we could see that flight coordination hadto be arranged with so many At most, seven helicopters were working simultaneously, four of which those who had it, andin some cases on mobile phones orvia signaling to civilian helicopters. During the first dayon Tuesday, two HKP4s, one HKP10 and one HKP9 from F21 were deployed tothe fire. During Wednesday, two HKP4s (V72 andY 68) also arrived inthe area. During Wednesday, the extinguishing work from the air hada better effect, partly dueto the number of helicopters that water bombed, but also through the choice to have two heavy helicopters work simultaneously in area by area. The initial idea wasto spread the resources across different areas and achieve geographical separation between the helicopters. However, dueto the progress ofthe fire, itwas necessary to allow more than one helicopter ina coordination area. However, it became easier for the crews to coordinate internally with an area division. helicopters deployed inan area that is limited from an aerial perspective and has poor visibility dueto smoke, says Tuoremaa. The rescue leader and his rescue team had everything else inthe wayof communication butno VHF radio. There should beone at every command post, says Kent Tuoremma. In conclusion, however, he notes that the task was solved ina very good way. – An important experience we learned was that the rescue leader also needs tobe informed fairly quickly about how long hecan use the helicopters and that he also needs to understand that the deployed helicopter might disappear in5 hours for service, says Kent Tuoremma. maintain contact with all helicopters onthe flight coordination frequency used inthe air between the helicopters. On Wednesday, they managed to find a sufficiently good aviation radio that had coverage throughout the area and, with the help ofATS (Air Traffic Service), established "Västbo Information" for the coordination ofair traffic inthe area. civilians, with water bombing the fire, plus aHkp 9for general advice. The fire became controllable during the latter part of Wednesday and from Thursday, August 17, the operation was carried outin the form of water spraying ofthe fire sources that had arisen and subsequent extinguishing inthe area. – Abig Achilles heel was that from the ground we couldn't Another difficulty was informing all crews about with the rescue services has worked very well. The connection was instead made on rescue radio channel 73to This was done with experienced personnel from the traffic management in Luleå. – We have experienced and competent staff and the cooperation
Eighty miles of hose and four trucks of material Kurt Ögren, rescue leader and materials coordinator Refueling first took place at Bilisten in Harads, until they were faced with the unpleasant problem of running outof fuel atthe pumps. The defense then provided two tanks for the garage in Västbo, oneof which was gasoline and the other diesel. From the first Sunday, they also hada tanker truck with aviation fuel inthe area so that the helicopters could refuel on site. Organisation Washing and pressure testing all the hose has also been a time- consuming task, which several rescue services have hadto help with. Getting the right things tothe right rescue service has also not been the easiest. Empty pumps asa storehouse and also ensured that the arriving forces were accommodated. "That wasn't enough, soit came from all over the country," says Kurt Ögren. – The first few days itwas from neighboring municipalities, but then Atthe station in Boden, a firefighter was responsible for the orders from the Rescue Service, he arranged a hangar for the F21 Eighty kilometers of hose and four fully loaded trucks with material… That says alot about the extent ofthe fire. For several weeks after the fire died down, the rescue services worked to pull inall the hose and well into the autumn, they worked on washing, testing and repairing. Major rework – One thing you have learned isto label your stuff properly, not just with adot, because several people may have done the same thing, inthe same color, says Kurt Ögren. The miserable terrain and circumstances took a toll on vehicles and materials. was connected already onday three and then the deliveries rolled on from there. Among other things, a large forest fire depot in Småland was used, which was intended asa contingency for the storm-stricken Småland. A large part ofthe material came from the Swedish Rescue Services Agency, which Depending onthe type of material involved, some was delivered tothe forces atthe fire scene, while other items were collected bythe fire department themselves atthe “garage” in Västbo, which served asa base for food, rest, refueling and rescue management. Kurt Ögren was called inas rescue leader on Saturday, the day after the fire started. His task was also toact as materials coordinator and procure and direct the handling ofall materials required bythe fire. Some deliveries went tothe Rescue Service in Boden, others directly tothe area of operation. – Aguy from the Swedish Rescue Service came upand was here for two days and helped distribute their material. He deserves alot of credit for that, because it made things so much easier, says Kurt Ögren. When the rescue forces were able to leave the fire area, the gigantic task of taking care ofall the material that had flowed in from the Swedish Rescue Services Agency and other rescue services inthe country remained. – Maintenance and repairs were arranged bythe rescue leader requisitioning spare parts that were sent upand, if needed, also someone who could fixit. What we could repair ourselves was often done bythe night staff during the night so that we could drive again inthe morning. We took the tracked vehicle down and repaired itin Boden, says Kurt Ögren.
Great benefit from training in crisis preparedness Olle Lindström, Boden municipal councilor Municipal councillor Olle Lindström, whois also chairman ofthe Boden emergency preparedness committee, was notified ofthe fire atan early stage. Asthe fire accelerated in scope onday two, Olle Lindström's involvement inthe work was expanded to include receiving a status report onthe fire every morning and evening during the most critical period. – Itis my hope that the experience of this summer's fire will result ina decision about fire monitoring during the dry summer period, says Olle Lindström. Olle Lindström spoke with the Minister of Defense when she was here visiting the fire area and discussed the necessity of reintroducing forest firefighting flights. The county governor has also promised to influence decision-makers on this issue. Personally, Olle Lindström believes that all administrative managers and civil servants involved in major accidents and incidents inthe municipality benefited greatly from the training they received in emergency preparedness just afew months before the fire. He also met with the Swedish Rescue Service staff during their days in Boden and Bodträskfors. The municipality of Boden has already received inquiries from other – Wehad two days of training where we went through everything about what obligations you have according tothe law, howto handle the issues in order, andwe also had practical exercises on mock events where wehad to discuss and think through different scenarios, he says. – Ifit had gotten even worse, so that wehad to evacuate allof Bodträskfors, for example, we would have done things differently. But now we felt like wehad it under some control, even though the area was large, says Olle Lindström. The municipality of Boden had planned todo a large exercise in which all organizations would participate. Now instead, they hadto test their organization ina real situation inand around a fire that galloped towards residential buildings and villages and spread smoke for several kilometers. A great asset was the training that the municipality had recently hadin emergency preparedness. – We assessed that wehad managed toput out the fire after the first One issue that has been discussed internally afterwards isthe mass media pressure and some believe that the media number should have been introduced atan earlier stage. – That training was incredibly important andI can truly recommend itto other municipalities. municipalities and will goout andbe helpful in such matters, including by participating in similar training courses in other municipalities. – They praised our organization and thought it worked very well, says Olle Lindström, who also believes that FRG made a great effort. Reintroducing forest firefighting flights Calls for education Hewas also given the opportunity to follow along and fly over the area and see the extent for himself. The fire was assessed tobe under control thanks tothe extinguishing work both from the air andon the ground, and with functioning containment lines. Onday four, the municipal management therefore decided notto call inthe Crisis Management Committee andto make the matter an extraordinary event. However, POSOM (“mental and social care inthe event of accidents or disasters”) went inand wasat the collection point together with FRG, the Volunteer Resource Group, during the evacuation ofthe affected villages. "The situation was tense for about aday, but then it turned around and flared up. Andit's possible that they could have come in earlier with the information, butI still think itwas good reporting," says Olle Lindström.
Good cooperation Ulf Leijon, Södra Roslagen Fire Protection Association – The volunteer resource organization was great. They helped and fixed everything possible andit was never stuck. During the five days that Södra Roslagen helped with the extinguishing work, he believes that the organization and layout ofthe work worked well, with cars, food, accommodation and other materials. – The only thing that could possibly have been better is radio communication atthe scene ofthe accident and well-functioning channels that we could be reached onvia radio communication on site. Butit was still possible aswe had private mobile phones with usand could be reached via them. for forest fires but requisitioned other equipment on site. On Wednesday, day six, the reinforcements that came from the furthest away arrived, ten men from Södra Roslagen and ten from Sundsvall. Something he found particularly positive was the FRG's efforts. They worked in groups of five people each and were responsible for – The collaboration with Norrbotten worked very well, excellently, says Ulf Leijon, who was part ofthe ten-man force that arrived from the Södra Roslagen Fire Protection Association. – The fire department that isin place isso burdened. Then itis good to bring in people who are further away whodo not have to think so much about everything around also having to function despite having a pressured personnel situation. This type of cooperation is something that wein the rescue services should include inour basic planning and create resources for. This is something we should have done a long time ago, believes Ulf Leijon. The forces from Södra Roslagen came with rescue clothing themselves for their division of labor and scheduling.
Start from scratch and dare to break patterns Patrik Bylin, Luleå rescue chief After a briefing in Boden, they were ordered togo tothe front. Since work was carried out around the clock and people needed to rest between shifts, they soon realized that they hadto look even further outto get more advance notice inthe staffing, something they had never hadto do before. Forces from the south Some lived onI19, others atthe station and some hadto stay ina boarding house in Bodträskfors' neighboring village, Harads. – I thought that inthe Stockholm area, there must be command post where they received their operational assignments. During the weekend, it became known inthe county that a large forest fire was going onin Bodträskfors. The rescue chief in Luleå, Patrik Bylin, called his colleague in Boden to jokingly ask how sweaty hewas. In response, he received "how soon can you come?". Patrik Bylin then became the one who worked side by side with the rescue chief inthe back line and was primarily responsible for staffing. Patrik Bylin then contacted Janne Wisén at Södra Roslagen's fire department. That's according to Patrik Bylin, the rescue chief in Luleå and responsible for recruiting personnel for the fire in Bodträskfors. He turned to Stockholm and Sundsvall toget new, fresh personnel who could replace the local forces. Start from the beginning – We chose to take ten from each location, because then they have twoof their own forces with a commander and four firefighters in each, who can work on their own schedule and manage the day and night themselves. He also contacted Sundsvall. Ten men each came from both places, a total of20 men, on Wednesday. front line, explains Patrik Bylin. – The demand for personnel was constantly based onthe needs of there area lotof people, says Patrik Bylin. The forces that came from other locations first arrived atthe fire station in Boden. There, they held a briefing with amap ofthe area, went over overall tactics, and provided practical information about food, lodging, and more. – Itwas easy toget people there. First wedid what we usually do when it'sabig deal, we went to neighboring municipalities and then to Västerbotten, he says. – Butwe declined because there were no more tasks forus, says Patrik Bylin. Patrik Bylin's experience ofthe work is that one should notbe afraid to take resources from afar and break with traditional approaches. He believes that one must dare to start from the beginning when building up resources, both personnel and material, and have as early contact as possible with the Rescue Service in order to quickly obtain resources, but also for the financial follow-up. He believes that helicopters are crucial, partly for the extinguishing work, but also toget an overview. And like many others, he experienced that the media pressure became too great for the management staff to handle, and that the information center made it much easier. He also highlights the FRG's efforts as very significant. Review in Boden After that, many people from other rescue services inthe country contacted usand offered their help.
Start early, think big Nils Sundberg, Head of Information, Municipality of Boden – But the pressure from the media decreased sowe never hadto doit, says Nils Sundberg. Nils Sundberg hadan information meeting scheduled with the county administrative board, county council and the county's other municipalities atthe beginning ofthe week and consulted with Bengt Nilsson. On Sunday evening, the first press release was issued bythe municipality, onthe municipality's website under "public information inthe event of accidents" and via a news desk. Before the weekend, a staffing plan was made tobe able to bring in knowledgeable staff andin 20 minutes the information department staff had the schedule ready. Whereupon Nils Sundberg ended upin Överkalix but was sent home. Instead of regular press conferences, they tried to respond tothe media via telephone and receive those who came tothe Rescue Services and answer questions as they arrived. Itwas quickly seen that the media wave wasat its greatest just before the morning, midday and evening broadcasts. The pressure also increased significantly when the Finnish forces arrived and with them the Finnish media. – He said, “Come on, I know where Ican get hold ofyou.” This isthe advice and experience of Boden Municipality's information manager Nils Sundberg after the fire. With an information line manned by separate personnel, the rescue management was significantly relieved. Close cooperation between the information department and the rescue management then meant that the media could be handled smoothly and objectively. In retrospect, hecan admit that if they had known what kind of onslaught there would be, the media number should have been putin earlier. They should also have registered where all the evacuees went, which was usually to family and friends, so they could have been reached easily. On Tuesday evening, Nils Sundberg setup a hotline for information onthe current situation and planned measures. The number was opened on Wednesday morning and was operated from the Rescue Service's premises in Boden, where they worked closely with the rear command. Information telephone – It worked well and there were clear rules ofthe game where everyone was loyal tothe decisions. ButI realize that if something had gone wrong, ifa house ora person had been harmed, it would have made the task more difficult. Butit feels good to know that wecan continue to think aswe did before the fire, says Nils Sundberg. Noone was allowed into the control center. Often, journalists wanted toget in touch with personnel onthe fire scene, and then a time was arranged for them to call or come outside the barriers to meet them. called on Tuesday when the fire had increased in scope and the rescue chief's direct number that was listed inthe press release was called down bythe media. and had constant updates onthe situation and what could be done. Three people worked here from 8am to10 pm every day during the first week. At night, itwas not possible to transfer the call, buton Wednesday evening the phone was transferred toan emergency number. “We agreed to have a briefing with the municipal management on Monday morning. The situation was unclear and the extent ofthe fire was increasing,” recalls Nils Sundberg. On Sunday afternoon, Nils Sundberg was contacted and that same evening hemet with rescue chief Bengt Nilsson. When the fire started on Friday, August 11, itwas still the holiday season. The municipality's information manager and the regular rescue manager were both on holiday. At first, itwas thought that itwas a regular forest fire, which was common during this period of this dry summer. The rescue manager and the information manager have previously hadan agreement that the rescue manager will contact them when he deems it necessary.
(cid:127) Information that was not ofan urgent nature was provided to (cid:127) Note where everyone whois evacuated is going soyou can (cid:127) Let everyone concerned within the municipality be trained in crisis preparedness. (cid:127) Closer cooperation between the FRG and the Home Guard to (cid:127) Contact the Swedish Rescue Services Agency early, this will make things easier both materially and financially. Ifthe emergency services radio is involved, you should have the same mobile number for those who take turns as rescue leaders so that they canbe reached quickly. (cid:127) The rescue leader must quickly know what applies tothe helicopters' flight time, need for service, refueling, etc., in order tobe able to plan the operations and not suddenly be left without oneor more promised helicopters. tobe. (cid:127) Don'tbe afraid to take resources from afar and break traditional approaches. together before the crisis comes. Discuss within the group how you will organize and structure your work. Getto know each other well within the group. Have a backpack with “nice-to-have” things from the start. Use the Home Guard's resources in crisis situations (firefighting equipment, vehicles, etc.). (cid:127) Have the voluntary civilian groups well prepared and (cid:127) Include a representative from the Home Guard inthe management group to facilitate communication between the two organizations. (cid:127) Asa rescue leader, a "hands-free" mobile phone isa must, as well as having your charger with you. on. Firefighters should put out fires, not shop for food, make coffee or answer the phone. cabinet. reach them. Preferably a form that they can easily fill outat the collection point. (cid:127) Evacuated homes attract burglaries and there were mysterious cars moving around the area and diesel was stolen at night. The first night after the evacuation there were no roadblocks. You have toget up early. the crews during refueling. (cid:127) Start early, think big. (cid:127) ARCC and ATK – trust the rescue manager/client's assessment of what resources are needed. (cid:127) Let each person and organization do what they do best (cid:127) On occasions when even civilians, who cannot be reached via rescue (cid:127) Be clear onthe part ofthe emergency services when requesting resources. (cid:127) Start from the beginning, both in terms of personnel and material. (cid:127) VHF radio for common coordination frequency for all helicopters from the ground. management or have a press number running even when there isno crisis. (cid:127) Bring ina local person who knows the land to explain what the area looks like, to avoid misunderstandings, driving errors, etc. (cid:127) The Volunteer Resource Group, FRG, is doing a great job that would otherwise have hadto be done by fire personnel. (cid:127) Take every alarm seriously from the start. (cid:127) Establish a media hotline early to relieve the rescue team. Collected experiences from the fire in Bodträskfors

