Management today Volume 63 • No. 3 • Summer 2003 W ILDLAND FIRE B EHAVIOR CASE S TUDIES ANDA NALYSES : PART 1W ILDLAND FIRE B EHAVIOR CASE S TUDIES ANDA NALYSES : PART 1
DEDICATION This special issue of Fire Management Today is dedicated tothe memory of Paul M. Gleason (1946–2003). His passion for wildland firefighter safety and his deep professional interest in wildland fire behavior will be sorely missed. Martin E. Alexander and David A. Thomas Issue Coordinators Editor’s note: This issue of Fire Management Today reprints articles from early editions ofthe journal, some of them decades old. Although the articles appear in today’s format, the text is reprinted largely ver­ batim and therefore reflects the style and usage ofthe time. We made minor wording changes for clarity, added intertitles and metric conversions where needed, and occasionally broke up paragraphs or broke out sidebars to improve readability. All illustrations are taken from the original articles. Erratum Inthe Spring 2003 issue of Fire Management Today, the table of contents showed an incorrect title for Stephen J. Pyne’s article (volume 63[2], page 17). The correct title is “Firestop II.” Fire Management Today is published bythe Forest Service ofthe U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, DC. The Secretary of Agriculture has determined that the publication of this periodical is necessary inthe transaction ofthe public business required bylaw of this Department. Fire Management Today isfor sale bythe Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, at: Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: 202-512-1800 Fax: 202-512-2250 Mail: Stop SSOP, Washington, DC 20402-0001 Fire Management Today is available onthe World Wide Webat <http://www.fs.fed.us/fire/fmt/>. AnnM. Veneman, Secretary April J. Baily U.S. Department of Agriculture General Manager Dale Bosworth, Chief Robert H. “Hutch” Brown, Ph.D. Forest Service Managing Editor Jerry Williams, Director Madelyn Dillon Fire and Aviation Management Editor Carol LoSapio Guest Editor Martin E. Alexander, Ph.D., and David A. Thomas Issue Coordinators TheU.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination inall its programs and activities onthe basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, or marital or family sta­ tus. (Not all prohibited bases apply toall programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA’s TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD). To file a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 1400 Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice and TDD). USDA isan equal opportunity provider and employer. Disclaimer: The use of trade, firm, or corporation names in this publication isfor the information and convenience ofthe reader. Such use does not constitute an official endorsement ofany product or service bythe U.S. Department of Agriculture. Individual authors are responsible for the technical accuracy ofthe material presented in Fire Management Today.
Volume 63 • No. 3 • Summer 2003 Firefighter and public safety isour first priority. Management today Historical photo from USDA Forest Service files showing the Wheeler Fire in 1948 “working down Bear Canyon toward Wheeler Gorge Camp” onthe Los Padres National Forest, CA. Photo: Forest Service Photograph Collection, USDA Forest Service, Washington Office, Washington, DC (no. 451594; F.E. Dunham, 1948). The FIRE 21 symbol (shown below andon the cover) stands for the safe and effective useof wildland fire, now and throughout the 21st century. Its shape represents the fire triangle (oxygen, heat, and fuel). The three outer red triangles represent the basic functions of wildland fire organizations (planning, operations, and aviation management), and the three critical aspects of wildland fire management (prevention, suppression, and prescription). The black interior represents land affected by fire; the emerging green points symbolize the growth, restoration, and sustainability associated with fire-adapted ecosystems. The flame represents fire itself asan ever-present force in nature. For more informa­ tion on FIRE 21and the science, research, and innovative thinking behind it, contact Mike Apicello, National Interagency Fire Center, 208-387-5460. Onthe Cover: C ONTENTS Wildland Fire Behavior Case Studies and Analyses: Value, Approaches, and Practical Uses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4M.E. Alexander andD.A. Thomas Blackwater Fire onthe Shoshone. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 Division of Fire Control The Factors and Circumstances That Ledto the Blackwater Fire Tragedy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11A.A. Brown Lessons From Larger Fires on National Forests, 1938 . . . . . . 15Roy Headley Lessons From Larger Fires on National Forests, 1939 . . . . . . 23Roy Headley Lessons ofthe McVey Fire, Black Hills National Forest . . . . . . 25A.A. Brown An Analysis ofthe Honey Fire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29C.F. Olsen The Bower Cave Fire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42 Leon R. Thomas The Possible Relation ofAir Turbulence to Erratic Fire Behavior inthe Southeast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46 George M. Byram and Ralph M. Nelson The Pinyon–Juniper Fuel Type Can Really Burn . . . . . . . . . . . . 52 Dwight A. Hester A Firewhirl of Tornadic Violence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54 Howard E. Graham Rate of Spread ona Washington Fern Fire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56 William G. Morris Fire-Whirlwind Formation as Favored by Topography and Upper Winds. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59 Howard E. Graham Relationship of Weather Factors to Rate of Spread ofthe Robie Creek Fire. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63R.T. Small AKey to Blowup Conditions inthe Southwest? . . . . . . . . . . . . 68 Robert W. Bates A Fire-Whirlwind in Alabama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71 Gordon Powell The Forest Fires of April 1963 inNew Jersey Point the Way to Better Protection and Management . . . . . . . . . 74 Wayne G. Banks and Silas Little The Harrogate Fire—March 15, 1964 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79B.J. Graham The Fire Behavior Team in Action: The Coyote Fire, 1964. . . . . 81 John D. Dell “Gleason Complex” Puts Up Huge “Plume”: A Tribute to Paul Gleason . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85 Paul Keller Interview With Paul Gleason . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91Jim Cook and Angela TomS HORT F EATURES Websites on Fire. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80 Guidelines for Contributors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95V ALUE , A PPROACHES , ANDP RACTICAL USES W ILDLAND FIRE B EHAVIOR CASE S TUDIES ANDA NALYSES : M.E. Alexander andD.A. Thomas S ince 1936, the Washington Office ofthe USDA Forest Service has published a period­ ical devoted to articles dealing with a very wide range of fire manage­ ment topics. The name of this jour­ nal has changed through the years, from Fire Control Notes, to Fire Management, to Fire Management Notes, and finally to Fire Manage­ ment Today.* A good many ofthe 243 issues that have been pub­ lished inthe past 67 years have included a fire-behavior-related article. With the passage of time, however, many of these articles have become “buried,” found only bythe most intrepid researchers onthe shelves of major libraries. Inan effort to unbury the past andto increase both institutional mem­ ory and organizational learning within the wildland fire communi­ ty, the authors approached the edi­ torial staff of Fire Management Today with the idea of republishing a selection of these past fire-behav­ ior-related articles. Weare pleased that they took usup onour sug­ gestion. Marty Alexander isa senior fire behavior research officer with the Canadian Forest Service atthe Northern Forestry Centre, Edmonton, Alberta; and Dave Thomas isthe regional fuels specialist for the USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Ogden, UT. * For more onthe history of Fire Management Today, see Hutch Brown, “How Did Fire Control Notes Become Fire Management Today?” Fire Management Today 60(1) [Winter 2000]: 8–14. This special issue of Fire Manage­ ment Today begins a series of three consecutive issues with articles related to fire behavior. This issue contains the first oftwo install­ ments of articles involving fire behavior case studies and analyses of wildfires; examples pertaining to prescribed fires are not included (e.g., Custer and Thorsen 1996). The19 case studies and analyses in this issue are presented in chrono­ logical order, from 1937 to 1967. The third issue in this series will be devoted to aids, guides, and knowledge-based protocols involved in forecasting wildland fire behavior for safe and effective fire suppression. General Value of Case Studies The importance of documented case studies or histories of wildland fires has been repeatedly empha­ sized by both fire managers and fire researchers (e.g., Byram 1960; Thomas 1994; Turner and others 1961). As long-time Forest Service wildland fire researcher/adminis­ trator Craig Chandler (1976) has noted, “Time and time again case histories have proven their value as training aids andas sources of research data.” The authors strong- Inan effort to unbury the past andto increase both institutional memory and organizational learning within the wildland fire community, weare reprinting past articles on fire behavior. ly support this notion and have endeavored to reflect itin our indi­ vidual work areas in fire research and fire management, respectively (Alexander and Lanoville 1987; Thomas 1991). The idea of relying on wildfires asa possible source of data is especially pertinent to empirically based schemes for quantitative fire behavior prediction that rely on this kind of information in whole orin part (e.g., Alexander 1985; Forestry Canada Fire Danger Group 1992; Rothermel 1991). This fact is especially significant atthe extreme endof the fire intensi­ ty scale, where experimental fires are exceedingly difficult to arrange (Alexander and Quintilio 1990; Cheney and others 1998). Information gleaned from wildland fire behavior case studies has also proved of value in testing and eval­ uating various fire models, theo­ ries, decision aids and support sys­ tems, and management guidelines (e.g., Anderson 1983; Haines and others 1986; Nelson 1993; Pearce and Alexander 1994). For example, Lindenmuth and Davis (1973) used an observation ofthe initial runof the Battle Fire, a28,400-acre
(11,500-ha) fire that occurred May14–20, 1972, onthe Prescott National Forest, AZ, to assess the performance of their empirically based model for predicting fire spread in Arizona’soak chaparral fuel type. Approaches to Case Studies There are many examples in North America and elsewhere where fire researchers and fire managers have attempted to observe and docu­ ment the behavior of free-burning fires, using various types of data collection methods and monitor­ ing equipment, onan adhoc ora more formal basis (e.g., Barney and others 1978; Barrows 1961; Billing 1986; Schaefer 1957; Traylor 1961*). These efforts extend back many years (Gisborne 1929) and continue into the 21st century (e.g., Burrows and others 2000). Fire behavior researchers are rarely inthe right place atthe right time to observe and docu­ ment the behavior of forest and range fires. While there have, of course, been some exceptions (e.g., Sneeuwjagt 1974; Stocks and Flannigan 1987), including escapes from outdoor experimental fires (Alexander and others 1991; Stocks 1987), for the most part fire opera­ tions personnel tend tobe inthe best position to make and record key observations. Probably the most concerted and systematic effort by fire researchers to observe and record actual fire behavior was made bythe Forest Service’s Southern Forest Fire Laboratory in Macon, GA, from the late 1950s to early 1970s (DeCoste and Sackett * A summary of this work canbe found inR.E. Traylor, “Correlation of Weather to Fire Spread in Grass and Brush Fuels onthe Snake River Plains in Southern Idaho,” Fire Control Notes 22(4) [Fall 1961]: 118–119. 1966; Sackett and DeCoste 1967). This wasno doubt duein large part to George Byram’s (1960) influ­ ence. Some limited documentation has also been undertaken by fire man­ agers and fire researchers serving as fire behavior officers or special­ ists/analysts on various wildland fire incidents (e.g., Johnson 1964; McCaw, Maher, and Gillen 1992; Norum 1982; Thomas 1991). Fire researchers have also been involved in many “after-the-fact” investiga­ tions (e.g., Butler and Reynolds 1997; Fogarty and others 1996; McCaw, Simpson, and Maher 1992). Van Wagner (1971) has pointed out that “some valuable reference data canbe collected by being inthe right place atthe right time. Itis, in fact, quite feasible to obtain good data by visiting the scene ofa … fire shortly after ithas occurred, while its history is still fresh both onthe ground andin the mind ofthe fire boss.” Byram (1954) made extensive useof the case study method of indi­ vidual fires inhis research into blowup fire behavior. Ashe notes, “Some ofthe observations and details of behavior are written down in fire reports, but most ofthe information is still inthe memories ofmen who worked onthe fires. Fire behavior may, there­ fore, be difficult to reconstruct at times, especially on fires which occurred a number of years ago. Usually, however, a surprising amount of detail canbe obtained by talking with men who were onthe fires andby going over the fire area with them.” A final possibility isthe hindsight analysis of major wildland fire inci­ dents inthe light of present-day knowledge and tools using existing historical information to establish the fire’s chronology and general behavior. The reports of Haines and Sando (1969), Stocks and Walker (1973), Street and Alexander (1980), and Rothermel (1993) are good examples of this approach to case studies. Pragmatic Value of Case Studies A practical fire manager, always interested inthe control of wild­ fires and the ignition of prescribed fires, might ask: What isthe useof historical fire behavior case stud­ ies? How can old documents help fire management personnel become better managers of forest and range fires, inall their forms? Beyond the recreation ofa “good read,” what utility do these articles offer? How can old essays become relevant fora 21st-century fire­ fighter? The old articles will only seem dated ifwe fail to make useof them. There are two primary rea­ sons to thoroughly study these fire behavior case studies: • To learn from them and thereby lessen the chance of making the same mistake again; and • To prepare ourselves notto be surprised tothe point of distrac­ tion bya fire’s surprising behav­ iorin a particular fuel type under a given weather condition. Not making the same mistake twice and being prepared tobe sur­ prised will goa long way toward creating a highly reliable firefight­ ing organization where safety truly matters. Unless we actively learn from past wildland fires, then the only waywe can gain additional fire behav­ ior knowledge isto actually experi-
ence a fire’s behavior orto model “Time and time again case histories the fire’s behavior ona computer have proven their value as training aids atour desk. Even the most active andas sources of research data.” fire behavior analyst (FBAN) rarely –Craig Chandler (1976) gets enough near-real-time oppor­ tunities to predict the spread and intensity in every fuel complex orto complete a prediction enough times to become good atit (Thomas 1994). The best learning scenario fora practicing fire behav­ iorist isa combination ofall three learning techniques: actively using case studies, getting field experi­ ence, and practicing computer modeling. Each isa distinct mode of learning and adaptation; when combined, they become a powerful model for continuous learning. Case study knowledge, coupled with experienced judgment and fire behavior modeling, is also consid­ ered an effective operational tech­ nique or procedure for appraising fire potential (Brown 1978). Burrows (1984) maintains that most wildland firefighters base their expectations ofhow a fire will behave largely on experience and, toa lesser extent, on fire behavior guides. If this is indeed the case, then itis worth reiterating the points made by Forest Service fire research pioneer Harry T. Gisborne (1948) about experienced judg­ ment: “For what is experienced judgment except opinion based on knowledge acquired by experience? Ifyou have fought forest fires in every different fuel type, under all possible kinds of weather, andif you have remembered exactly what happened in each of these combi­ nations, your experienced judg­ ment is probably very good. Butif you have not fought all sizes of fires inall kinds of fuel types under all kinds of weather then your * For more onthe staff ride technique, see the various articles onthe Dude Fire Staff Ride in Fire Management Today 62(4) [Fall 2001]. experience does not include know­ ledge ofall the conditions.” Presumably then, case studies can help supplement and thereby strengthen (but never replace) a person’s experience level. Safety Value of Case Studies Aswe read through this chronolog­ ical selection of articles, especially the accounts of forest fires where firefighters lost their lives or there were near-misses or unforeseen blowups, wecan ask ourselves and our crews whether we have fully grasped the major “lessons learned” from these past fire behavior events. Excellent methods of using past fire behavior knowl­ edge from case studies to increase wildland firefighter safety inthe future are the staff ride (Alexander 2002; Thomas and Cook 2002),* the sand box exercise (Euler 1946), yearly fire refreshers (e.g., the 2001 USDI Bureau of Land Management Fireline Safety Refresher videos), and weekly tailgate safety meet­ ings. For example, oneof these articles could be handed out each week to members ofan organized fire crew. The crew would be given time to read and ponder the article. Then, ina group setting, with the fire foreman (i.e., hotshot superintend­ ent, smokejumper-in-charge, local fire management officer, etc.) act­ ingas facilitator, the crew could beled through a series of questions that the article has inspired. For example: • Is there something that wecan apply toour current situation? • Have we learned all that this old fire hasto teach us? • Could the same situation occur today? • What arewe going todo differ­ ently after reading this case study? This process, if faithfully followed throughout a fire season, would increase both mindfulness and resilience (Weick and Sutcliffe 2001), the two hallmarks of indi­ viduals and their organizations determined todo everything they canto control and use wildland fire safely. Both authors have used case stud­ iesto lead training sessions inthe classroom. Oneof us (Thomas) has also used the technique inthe field atthe site of past fires. In June 1994, a group of FBANs ona visit tothe site ofthe 1949 Mann Gulch Fire were asked, using existing his­ torical case study information asa starting point fora fire behavior prediction, if they could have pre­ vented the firefighter fatalities that occurred on this infamous fire. Using the available historical fire information, a similar question was asked ofa large group of fire management personnel ona staff ride ofthe 1990 Dude Fire (Thomas and Cook 2002). In both of these examples, many ofthe stu­ dents said that these “training” sessions were some ofthe best they had ever attended. Using case stud­ iesor histories, an “old” fire’s fire behavior came alive.
“A surprising amount of detail canbe obtained by talking with men who were onthe fires andby going over the fire area with them.” –George Byram (1954) Another benefit of having these articles available again isfor their use within fuel specialist reports used in environmental assess­ ments. Fuel specialists are increas­ ingly called upon to justify whyan interdisciplinary team recom­ mended one fire hazard abatement technique over another. These case histories, especially the descrip­ tions of fire behavior ina given fuel type (e.g., Helms 1979), could be cited in those reports (or hyper- linked toa main database), saving much analysis time. The fuels spe­ cialist would not have to explain howa fire might burn ina given fuel type, for she orhe would have a published account to cite or hyperlink to. Learning Contribution A learning organization has been defined asone that is “skilled at creating, acquiring, interpreting, transferring, and retaining knowl­ edge, andat purposefully modify­ ing its behavior to reflect new knowledge insights” (Garvin 2000). Fire behavior case studies goa long way toward preparing a foun­ dation for organizational learning; inso doing, they follow the true spirit of learning implied in this definition. Simply put, our fire management culture, now domi­ nated bya learning pattern of trial and error, would become a learn­ ing culture, onein which asys­ tematic study ofthe past through the use of case studies would become a routine procedure. This special issue of Fire Manage­ ment Today devoted to fire behav­ ior, and the two others that will follow, arein keeping with the ideals and sentiment expressed byRoy Headley (1936) inthe very first issue of Fire Control Notes. Headley, who cofounded the jour­ nalas the head ofthe Forest Service’s Division of Fire Control (the predecessor of today’s Fire and Aviation Management), called for integrating and sharing “the expe­ rience, thinking, and experiments” ofthe many people engaged in wildland fire management. To this end, Headley envisioned Fire Control Notes as “a common meet­ ing ground, a clearing-house of developments.” In this sense, Fire Management Today, by republish­ ing the past (and thereby reviving itfor the future), has rediscovered its own unique niche. Acknowledgments The authors offer their sincerest heartfelt appreciation to Hutch Brown, Madelyn Dillon, and Carol LoSapio, editors of Fire Manage­ ment Today, for their significant contributions to this special issue, andto April Baily, the journal’s general manager, for supporting the concept of these special issues on wildland fire behavior. Their dedication and outstanding editori­ al abilities have brought “life” to many ofthe articles contained in this issue that have long been forgotten. References Alexander, M.E. 1985. Estimating the length-to-breadth ratio of elliptical forest fire patterns. In: Donoghue, L.R.; Martin, R.E., eds. Proceedings ofthe Eighth Conference on Fire and Forest Meteorology; 1985 April 29–May2; Detroit, MI. SAF Publ. 85–04. Bethesda, MD: Society of American Foresters: 287–304. Alexander, M.E. 2002. The staff ride approach to wildland fire behavior and firefighter safety awareness training. Fire Management Today. 62(4): 25–30. Alexander, M.E.; Lanoville, R.A. 1987. Wildfires asa source of fire behavior data: A case study from Northwest Territories, Canada. In: Postprint Volume, Ninth Conference on Fire and Forest Meteorology; 1987 April 21–24; San Diego, CA. Boston, MA: American Meteorological Society: 86–93. Alexander, M.E.; Quintilio, D. 1990. Perspectives on experimental fires in Canadian forestry research. Mathematical and Computer Modelling. 13(12): 17–26. Alexander, M.E.; Stocks, B.J.; Lawson, B.D. 1991. Fire behavior in black spruce–lichen woodland: The Porter Lake Project. Inf. Rep. NOR–X–310. Edmonton, AB: Forestry Canada, Northern Forestry Centre. Anderson, H.E. 1983. Predicting wind-driv­ en wild land fire size and shape. Res. Pap. INT–305. Ogden, UT: USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. Barney, R.J.; Noste, N.V.; Wilson, R.A. 1978. Rates of spread of wildfire in Alaskan fuels. Res. Note PNW–311. Portland, OR: USDA Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Forest and Range Experiment Station. Barrows, J.S. 1961. Natural phenomena exhibited by forest fires. In: Berl, W.G., ed. Proceedings ofthe International Symposium onthe Useof Models in Fire Research; 1960 November 9–10; Washington, DC. Publ. 786. Washington, DC: National Academy of Sciences— National Research Council. Billing, P. 1986. Operational aspects ofthe infra-red line scanner. Res. Rep. No. 26. Melbourne, VIC: Victoria Department of Conservation, Forests & Lands, Fire Protection Branch. Brown, J.K. 1978. Fuel inventory and appraisal. Paper presented atthe USDA Forest Service National Fire-Danger and Fire-Weather Seminar; 1972 November 14–16; Missoula, MT. Burrows, N.D. 1984. Predicting blow-up fires inthe jarrah forest. Tech. Pap. No. 12. Perth, WA: Forests Department of Western Australia. Burrows, N.; Ward, B.; Robinson, A. 2000. Behavior and some impacts ofa large wildfire inthe Gnangara maritime pine (Pinus pinaster) plantation, Western Australia. CALMScience. 3: 251–260. Butler, B.W.; Reynolds, T.D. 1997. Wildfire case study: Butte City Fire, southeastern Idaho, July 1, 1994. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT–GTR–351. Ogden, UT: USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station.
Byram, G.M. 1954. Atmospheric conditions related to blowup fires. Stn. Pap. No. 35. Asheville, NC: USDA Forest Service, Southeastern Forest Experiment Station. [Reprinted as: National Fire Equipment System Publication NFES 2565 bythe National Wildfire Coordinating Group, Boise, ID.] Byram, G.M. 1960. A problem analysis and proposed research program for the Southern Forest Fire Laboratory. Macon, GA: USDA Forest Service, Southeastern Forest Experiment Station, Southern Forest Fire Laboratory. Chandler, C.C. 1976. Meteorological needs of fire danger and fire behavior. In: Baker, D.H.; Fosberg, M.A., tech. coords. Proceedings ofthe Fourth National Conference on Fire and Forest Meteorology; 1976 November 16–18; St. Louis, MO. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM–32. Fort Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station: 38–41. Cheney, N.P.; Gould, J.S.; Catchpole, W.R. 1998. Prediction of fire spread in grass­ lands. International Journal of Wildland Fire. 8: 1–13. Custer, G.; Thorsen, J. 1996. Stand-replace­ ment burn inthe Ocala National Forest—A success. Fire Management Notes. 56(2): 7–12. DeCoste, J.H.; Sackett, S.S. 1966. Baptism by fire. Southern Lumberman. 213(2656): 169–170. Euler, D.H. 1946. The sand boxas a fire- control training tool. Fire Control Notes. 7(1): 37–39. Fogarty, L.G.; Jackson, A.F.; Lindsay, W.T. 1996. Fire behaviour, suppression and lessons from the Berwick Forest Fire of26 February 1995. FRI Bull. No. 197, For. Rural Fire Sci. Tech. Ser. Rep. No. 3. Rotorua and Wellington, NZ: New Zealand Forest Research Institute and National Rural Fire Authority. Forestry Canada Fire Danger Group. 1992. Development and structure ofthe Canadian Forest Fire Behavior Prediction System. Inf. Rep. ST–X–3. Ottawa, ON: Forestry Canada, Science and Sustainable Development Directorate. Garvin, D.A. 2000. Learning in action: A guide to putting the learning organiza­ tion to work. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press. Gisborne, H.T. 1929. The complicated con­ trols of fire behavior. Journal of Forestry. 27: 311–312. Gisborne, H.T. 1948. Fundamentals of fire behavior. Fire Control Notes. 9(1): 13–24. Haines, D.A.; Main, W.A.; Simard, A.J. 1986. Fire-danger rating and observed wildfire behavior inthe northeastern United States. Res. Pap. NC–274. St. Paul, MN: USDA Forest Service, North Central Forest Experiment Station. Haines, D.A.; Sando, R.W. 1969. Climatic conditions preceding historically great fires inthe North Central Region. Res. Pap. NC–84. St. Paul, MN: USDA Forest Service, North Central Forest Experiment Station. Headley, R. 1936. Fire Control Notes offers its services. Fire Control Notes. 1(1): 3–4 [reprint: Fire Management Today. 60(1): 6–7]. Helms, J.A. 1979. Positive effects ofpre­ scribed burning on wildfire intensities. Fire Management Notes. 40(3): 10–13. Johnson, V.J. 1964. Chronology and analy­ sisof the Hughes Fire, 1962. Res. Note NOR–8. Juneau, AK: USDA Forest Service, Northern Forest Experiment Station. Lindenmuth, A.W., Jr.; Davis, J.R. 1973. Predicting fire spread in Arizona’soak chaparral. Res. Pap. RM–101. Fort Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. McCaw, L.; Maher, T.; Gillen, K. 1992. Wildfires inthe Fitzgerald River National Park, Western Australia, December 1989. Tech. Rep. No. 26. Perth, WA: Department of Conservation and Land Management. McCaw, L.; Simpson, G.; Mair, G. 1992. Extreme wildfire behaviour in3-year-old fuels ina Western Australian mixed euca­ lyptus forest. Australian Forestry. 55: 107–117. Nelson, R.M., Jr. 1993. Byram’s derivation ofthe energy criterion for forest and wildland fires. International Journal of Wildland Fire. 3: 131–138. Norum, R.A. 1982. Predicting wildfire behavior in black spruce forests of Alaska. Res. Note PNW–401. Portland, OR: USDA Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Forest and Range Experiment Station. Pearce, H.G.; Alexander, M.E. 1994. Fire danger ratings associated with New Zealand’s major pine plantation wildfires. In: Proceedings ofthe 12th Conference on Fire and Forest Meteorology; 1993 October 26–28; Jekyll Island, GA. SAF Publ. 94–02. Bethesda, MD: Society of American Foresters: 534–543. Rothermel, R.C. 1991. Predicting behavior and size of crown fires inthe Northern Rocky Mountains. Res. Pap. INT–438. Ogden, UT: USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station. Rothermel, R.C. 1993. Mann Gulch Fire: A race that couldn’tbe won. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT–299. Ogden, UT: USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station. Sackett, S.S.; DeCoste, J.H. 1967. Anew mobile fire laboratory. Fire Control Notes. 28(4): 7–9. Schaefer, V.J. 1957. The relationship ofjet streams to forest wildfires. Journal of Forestry. 55: 419–425. Sneeuwjagt, R.J. 1974. Evaluation ofthe grass fuel model ofthe National Fire Danger Rating System. M.S. thesis. Seattle, WA: University of Washington. Stocks, B.J. 1987. Fire potential inthe spruce budworm-damaged forests of Ontario. Forestry Chronicle. 63: 8–14. Stocks, B.J.; Flannigan, M.D. 1987. Analysis ofthe behavior and associated weather fora 1986 northwestern Ontario wildfire: Red Lake No. 7. In: Postprint Volume, Ninth Conference on Fire and Forest Meteorology; 1987 April 21–24; San Diego, CA. Boston, MA: American Meteorological Society: 94–100. Stocks, B.J.; Walker, J.D. 1973. Climatic conditions before and during four signif­ icant forest fire situations in Ontario. Inf. Rep. O–X–187. Sault Ste. Marie, ON: Canadian Forestry Service, Great Lakes Forest Research Centre. Street, R.B.; Alexander, M.E. 1980. Synoptic weather associated with five major forest fires in Pukaskwa National Park. Int. Rep. SSD–80–2. Toronto, ON: Environment Canada, Atmospheric Environment Service, Ontario Region. Thomas, D.A. 1991. The Old Faithful Inn fire runof September 7, 1988. In: Andrews, P.L.; Potts, D.F., eds. Proceedings ofthe 11th Conference on Fire and Forest Meteorology; 1991 April 16–19; Missoula, MT. SAF Publ. 91–04. Bethesda, MD: Society of American Foresters: 272–280. Thomas, D. 1994. A case for fire behavior case studies. Wildfire. 3(3): 45, 47. Thomas, D.; Cook, W. 2002. Dude Fire staff ride. Fire Management Today. 62(4): 4–5. Traylor, R.E. 1961. Correlation of weather to fire spread in grass and brushland fuel types onthe Snake River Plains of southern Idaho. M.S. thesis. Missoula, MT: Montana State University. Turner, J.A.; Lillywhite, J.W.; Pieslak, Z. 1961. Forecasting for forest fire services. Tech. Note No. 42. Geneva, Switzerland: World Meteorological Organization. Van Wagner, C.E. 1971. Two solitudes in forest fire research. Inf. Rep. PS–X–29. Chalk River, ON. Canadian Forestry Service, Petawawa Forest Experiment Station. Weick, K.E.; Sutcliffe, K.M. 2001. Managing the unexpected: Assuring high performance inan ageof complexity. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass—A Wiley Company. ■
B LACKWATER FIRE ONTHE S HOSHONE * USDA Forest Service, Division of Fire Control P reliminary reports in hand as this issue goes to press show that initial action on this light­ ning fire was alert, prompt and vig­ orous—quite remarkably so, con­ sidering that the Shoshone National Forest is rated asa low- danger forest, and doesn’t even have lookout stations. The country was high and steep—just below timber line. In spots the lodgepole pine and fir were dense and limby—the familiar patches of rather scrubby jungle found onthe better sites at high elevations. There were steep slopes covered with dense but not jungly stands— just the setting for wind-driven crown fires of intense heat. Pictures ofthe area show bare ridge tops and open places here and there. Fuel onthe ground seems to have been quite light—as would be normal under such con­ ditions. One would guess that the fuel experts would rate the area at “Low rate of spread” and “Low resistance to control.” But when the “heavy” wind started sweeping this way and that on Saturday, August 21, fifteen men lost their lives. Sixof these died from their burns after the blow-up. Large Loss of Life The danger from such accidents probably is statistically less than the danger from automobile acci­ dents, which isso familiar weThe Division of Fire Control inthe USDA Forest Service’s national office was the precursor ofthe agency’s Fire and Aviation Management Staff, Washington Office, Washington, DC. * The article is reprinted from Fire Control Notes 1(5) [20 September 1937]: 305–306. When the heavy wind started sweeping this way and that on Saturday, August 21, fifteen men lost their lives. largely ignore it. But such fire accidents do happen and impress usall the more because of their infrequency. This isthe largest loss of life from a single National Forest fire since 1910. Itis the irony of fate that ithad to occur ona National Forest which, sofar ascan be determined from the records here, has had only one other large fire during its whole history. The latest reports on size of this fire putit at1,100 acres (445ha). Tothe men who died in this disas­ ter, all fire control men everywhere pay tribute. Tothe bereaved fami­ lies they extend the deepest sympa­ thy. Tothe survivors, and particu­ larly the exceptionally large num­ berof injured men, is extended appreciation and cordial concern from all those engaged inthe high adventure of protecting American forests from devastation by fire. District Ranger Post’s statement (excerpted inthe sidebar on page 10) is published asan authentic case record ofthe processes of judgment in such situations where aman must think first and think clearly about the safety ofthe menin his crew. His words will recall toall experienced men many days of harassed effort toget the line ahead and the fire mopped up before something happened—but always with a running accompani­ ment ofa plan (sometimes uncon­ scious) for the best wayto safety for the crew if something went wrong. His statement is also a technical case history ofthe handling ofmen in such crises. His record could be followed better with the aid ofa map, but even without it much canbe gleaned from the story. Heroic Conduct Asa record of unassuming heroic conduct the statement needs no comment. Itwas dictated straight­ away inthe presence ofD.P. Godwin, with no rehashing or edit­ ing except the correction ofthe spelling ofone name and the inser­ tion ofthe name of Bert Sullivan inone place. Post has some bad burns, and both hands and both sides ofhis face are heavily band­ aged. Heis outof danger, but will bear scars. Junior Forester Tyrrell of Ranger Post’s party died later from his burns. In speaking ofhim inhis signed statement, Enrollee Alcario Serros says: Then wesaw that we didn’t have no chance togo back, so Ranger Post told Mr. Tyrrell to take care ofus, andhe took usup tothe rim rock. The fire started from the
east, and then south, and then the west. Itwas the west fire that burned us. Asthe fire came closer tous we layed down onthe rock ridge. Mr. Tyrrell layed ontop ofme. When the fire burned Mr. Tyrrell heran andI ran, too, about 10 feet. District Ranger Clayton, whose mes­ sage Ranger Post received, died with sixof his men. A seventh got out, but died from his burns. ■ When cut off from the safety sought above timber line (center background), Ranger Post and40 men who followed his instructions survived by taking what shelter they could, first onthe left (north) side, then the right side ofthe bare spot onthe ridge (center foreground). Junior Forester Tyrrell died later from burns inflicted bythe flames and heat that swept over them. The Blowup Begins The following eyewitness account* describes the onset ofthe blowup onthe Blackwater Fire onthe after­ noon of August 21, 1937. The blowup resulted from the passage ofa dry cold front. Up until this time no wind wasin Iran for some distance tothe directly into the line ofmen on evidence. Almost like a shot out northwest and climbed a rocky line construction. Ina few sec- ofa gun, there wasa heavy wind. point and saw below mea spot fire onds numerous fires appeared It swept through the area inas of considerable size burning tothe below the line.... Almost at once near asI can determine ina northeast and around a ridge toit was clearly evident that further northeasterly direction, this car- the north ofus. My impression was attempts at line construction in ried sparks over the constructed that this fire should be immediate- that area was out ofthe question. line and below us. I heard a fire ly taken care ofand possibly aban- I sent outa call for all mento roar tothe northwest andit don work onour line in order to abandon their work and proceed appeared tobe a considerable dis- doit. tothe ridge tothe northeast. tance away. I called to Tyrrell and This was approximately three told him that something wasI turned to summon help for this o’clock, P.M. going wrong and that Iwas going job when there was decided change to investigate. inthe wind again and the spot fire U.J. Post, District Forest Ranger was swept into the southwest August 27, 1937 * Excerpt from “Statement by Ranger Urban J. Post,” Fire Control Notes 1(5) [20 September 1937]: 308–315. Photos taken ofthe blowup canbe found inE. Kauffman, “Death in Blackwater Canyon,” American Forests 43(11) [November 1937]: 534–540.
THE F ACTORS ANDC IRCUMSTANCES THAT LED TOTHE B LACKWATER FIRE T RAGEDY * A.A. Brown Original editor’s note: Included asa vital part ofthe full report onthe Blackwater Fire was the report made byA.A. Brown after an exhaustive study ofthe fire behavior and the critical circumstances which converged to bring about the tragedy. Mr. Brown had been only recently transferred to Region 2to head the fire control work of that Region, andhe brought tothe tasks involved in this disaster the sound knowledge and discern­ ment springing from long and successful fire experience. Four Critical Factors W hile no proof is available, the nature and circum­ stances ofthe blow-upon August 21 seem to indicate that an undiscovered spot fire, probably from the night before, tothe north of Clayton Gulch and over the small, sharp ridge in Clayton Creek (one-half mile [0.8km] west and north ofthe point where the Clayton group was later found), was the first critical factor inmak­ ing the trap in which the men were caught and burned to death on that day. Apparently this spot fire at first spread upthe slope imme­ diately above tothe northeast. This is clearly indicated bythe note Ranger Clayton sent to Ranger Post atthe time the spot fire spread conspicuously just prior tothe blow-up. The second critical circumstance was the fact that the timber above the newly constructed line had not crowned out except fora small fringe along the south edge. The third critical circumstance was the fact that “spotting” from the fire ofthe previous day had given a When this article was originally published, A.A. Brown was head of Fire Control for the USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Region. * The article is reprinted from Fire Control Notes 1(6) [December 6, 1937]: 384–387. ragged edge tothe burning area onthe steep downhill side, with small spots below the general front. Asa result the fire fighters found it expedient to connect the fire line below the hottest spots, leaving considerable unburned surface fuel inside the line atthe lowest point. The fourth critical element was the nature ofthe forest fuel in this drainage. It consisted ofa very dense stagnated stand of Douglas fir with a varying mixture—5to 15per cent—of spruce andof alpine fir. A dense overhead canopy exist­ ed, with dead branches nearly tothe ground, with many small, brushy, dead or nearly dead sup­ pressed trees asan understory, a considerable volume of sound dead branches, logs and suppressed trees onthe ground, and with vary­ ing amounts of moss throughout the canopy andon all the dead branches. In addition, slopes of20 to60 per cent prevailed. These four factors set the stage for what happened. The nature and circumstances ofthe blow-upon August 21 indicate that there were four critical factors involved. Strong Wind The relative humidity at1 p.m. on August 21was 6per cent, with a temperature of90 ºF (32ºC) atthe fire danger station atthe Wapiti Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) camp, two and one-half miles (4km) away at2,000 feet (610m) lower elevation. At approximately 3:30p.m., with these critical cir­ cumstances prevailing, a strong gusty wind of apparently at least 30 miles’ velocity per hour (48km/h) came up from the south­ west. About 3:45p.m. it swerved and became a west wind. (These times are based onthe circumstan­ tial evidence of other events ofthe fire.) The duration of this strong velocity is uncertain because ofthe strong convectional winds setup almost at once bythe crowning. Itis rea­ sonable to suppose that the change in direction may have been largely a convectional effect. Atthe start, timber began to crown above the line and the whole fire there began to pick upin intensity andto throw new spots below the line, as might be expected. Possibly this
exerted a strong convectional pull The two crown fires then rapidly closed together onthe spot fire below, which had with the cyclonic effect of such a circumstance, also begun to crown. sweeping clean the major portion ofthe head Atany rate, the course ofthe drive ofthe Clayton Creek drainage. from the spot fire changed tothe east and started directly upthe drainage. The two crown fires then rapidly closed together with the cyclonic effect of such a circum­ stance, which reached its climax at4:20p.m. Asa result, the major portion ofthe head ofthe Clayton Creek drainage from the spot fire upto Double Mountain was swept clean ina final crown fire confla­ gration which was completed by approximately 5p.m. In this conflagration 9 deaths occurred directly. Six additional men were so badly burned that death ensued, and36 additional men suffered injuries from which they are recovering. Firefighter Movements* Just before the crowning started, the distribution ofmen onthe newly constructed line in Clayton Creek had been as follows: Five menof the National Park Service crew onmop-up were operating asfar asthe first small park, about 5 chains (330 feet [101m]) northeast ofthe ridge. Beyond them for30 chains (1,980 feet [603m]) were 6men ofthe BPR crew, who had been actively pushing the new line construction from this point on, and who had got asfar as Clayton Gulch, plus afew men who had been dropped off from Post’s crew. Beyond them were Ranger Post, with Foremen Tyrrell and Saban and sub-foreman Hale, with about 40men who had taken upthe new line at Clayton Gulch and had completed 16 chains (1,056 feet *See the maps on page 14 (from the article byD.P. Godwin referenced inthe sidebar on page 13). [322m]) atthe time the blow-up occurred. Clayton, who had been placed in charge as sector boss ofthe new construction, was following the fresh crew inand checking upon conditions ashe went. Apparently hewas checking particularly on spot fires. The BPR crew were giv­ ing most of their attention to spot fires attwo points below the30 chains (1,980 feet [603m]) of line they had constructed. They were about 20 chains (1,320 feet [402m]) in from Trail Ridge, except for Pierce, oneof their members who had been left alone onhot line ata point about 10 chains (660 feet [201m]) in, where several logs were on fire close tothe fire trench. Two men were left to help himas Post’s crew came past and about 6men were left with Saban and Clayton to work on spot fires. Bythe time this distribution was completed, about 3:45p.m., Post, Clayton, and Fifield, probably simultaneously, saw evidence ofan uncontrolled spot fire. Fifield, according tohis statement, wason the rock point of Trail Ridge atthe time and thought at first that itwas the spot near the bottom ofthe first gulch which had previous­ ly been found and trenched, but discovered instead that itwas in line with it, but over the small ridge just tothe north. Heat once gave thought to Wolcott’s crew, who were in this vicinity, but found them coming outon account ofthe crowning there. Wolcott immediately went onup Trail Ridge and also called out the men from the fire trail north of Trail Ridge. Pierce, who had been near the highest point ofthe fire trail before it dipped down into Clayton Gulch, had already come outto the first small park with the two CCC boys helping him because ofa flash of crowning just below him, which apparently crossed the fire line but died down again atthe little park. He attempted toget the attention ofthe rest ofthe BPR crew, but, receiving no answer, decided they were withdrawing the other way. About 6 other CCC boys were also assembled atthe park, and all came out together at Wolcott’s alarm call. The heavy crowning apparent­ ly occurred shortly afterward (about 4p.m.). Post’s attention was attracted tothe spot fire when it started crowning toward the north­ east upthe slope onthe north side of Clayton Creek. His first thought wasto take his crew toit, but the wind changed and the fire started upthe gulch before he could take any action to that end. Accordingly he started moving his crew from its path as best he could, as described inhis statement. Death Trap Clayton’s movements are not so clear in detail. Itis evident from the note he dispatched to Post that the spot fire had attracted his attention, apparently from onthe spur ridge just south ofthe gulch, where hewas later trapped. Upto the time this fire started directly upthe gulch itwas a threat tothe
With the direction ofthe fire’s path directly upthe gulch, it probably acted asa furnace draft and became a death trap. line above which [it] must be stopped, but probably did not appear tobe dangerous to life. Clayton sawit was the focal point ifthe line were tobe held, and that more men than the7 with him would be required. It does not seem likely that he waited onthe ridge above Clayton Gulch the20 minutes or more that seems to have elapsed from the first active spreading ofthe spot fire below until the general blow­ up occurred. Probably he started down toward it, either with his group or alone. If alone, he proba­ bly left instructions for his group to await his investigation of poten­ tialities below. Or, ifhe took his group, he probably left oneor more menat the spring inthe gulch to await reinforcements from Post. In either case, the natural route of travel toward the spot fire would be down the gulch toward it. Once off the ridge the full poten­ tialities ofthe fire below would not have been immediately as evident tohim asit wasto Post above. Presumably, as soon ashe saw what was about to happen, he turned back toget the men atthe spring. In doing sohe hadto go back upthe slope ahead ofthe fire and probably gotto his men just atthe time that every avenue of escape was cut off. Had the fire been going across topography the bare gulch might have served satis­ factorily asa refuge. With the direction ofits path directly upthe gulch, it probably acted asa fur­ nace draft and became a death trap. Reconstructed Tragedy In conclusion, the reconstructed tragedy depended on each ofthe four factors first discussed which contributed tothe behavior ofthe fire, plus the distribution and movement ofthe menat the time. The high wind and burning condi- Other Articles onthe Blackwater Fire Godwin, D.P. 1937. The handling ofthe Blackwater Fire. Fire Control Notes. 1(6) [6 December 1937]: 373–383. Brauneis, K. 2002. 1937 Blackwater Fire investigation: Boost for smokejumpers? Fire Management Today. 62(2): 24–26. tions alone, without the spot fire, would have created a dangerous situation, and would have no doubt forced abandonment ofthe newly constructed fire line, but without loss of life, since distances to safety were not great. Exactly the same strategy employed would likely have succeeded without incident afew hours earlier, or perhaps even at that time ofday ifno sudden change in wind velocity or direc­ tion had occurred. Had the spot fire not been in line with one already controlled, orhad not been hidden bythe sharp little ridge inthe bottom of Clayton Creek, it would have had earlier attention from the Park crew from Trail Ridge, and again the situation would have been changed. More time onthe part of either Clayton or Post to fully scout out the potentialities ofthe fire ahead ofthe crews might have prevented the tragedy. Earlier arrival ofthe new crew, even byas little asa half hour, would have resulted in completing the new line and would have con­ centrated the attention ofall supervising officers and man-power onall threats to holding it. This would have resulted ina different distribution ofthe crews and prob­ ably slight danger. Many other premises may also be drawn, but the matter of timing of action ofthe fire vs. movement ofmen gave the distinctive and fatal combination. ■
Aerial view of Blackwater Fire, looking southeast directly upthe head of Clayton Creek. Dashed line indicates the lost control line. Center arrow shows the gulch where Ranger Clayton and seven men were trapped. Arrow toward the upper left shows the open point onthe ridge where Ranger Post took refuge with his crew.
L ESSONS FROM L ARGER F IRES ONN ATIONAL F ORESTS , 1938* Roy Headley Editor’s note: Roy Headley took the “lessons learned” from field reports on “larger fires” (fires cov­ ering more than 300 acres [121ha]). In places, he added com­ ments, indicated by brackets and the italicized notation “–Ed.” Among fire control men there isa real difference of opinion onthe extent to which study should be concentrated onthe larger fires as distinguished from all fires. Some believe that concentration of atten­ tion on large fires is dangerous and may result in neglect ofthe meth­ ods and principles which areof importance in keeping small fires from becoming larger. The answer is probably a matter of proper balance. Both classes should be studied. Failure to review the action taken on even the smallest fires invites weakness­ es that will let more little ones grow into big ones. But larger fires have characteristics peculiar to themselves. Management ofthe larger fire jobs isa rather distinct branch of control—anda backward branch. Failure to study the action on these larger fires invites weak­ nesses that will let big ones grow into bigger ones. These bigger ones hurt, too. Outof a total of219,000 acres (88,000ha) burned in 1938, 35,000 acres (14,000ha) were lost When this article was originally published, Roy Headley headed the Division of Fire Control, USDA Forest Service, Washington, DC. * The article isan abridged version of sequential arti­ cles published in Fire Control Notes 3(3) [Summer 1939]: 6–17and 3(4) [Fall 1939]: 30–45. Failure to study the action on larger fires invites weaknesses that will let big ones grow into bigger ones. inone fire. Seventy-five thousand acres (30,000ha) were lost inthe four largest fires. Lessons Learned Such an infinite variety of prob­ lems are involved inthe manage­ ment of large fire jobs that thoughtful men seldom fail to learn from each one something which should be guarded against inthe future, something which should be done differently, some cherished belief which must be modified or abandoned. For35 years I have been working onor observing suppression jobs, butI still learn something from every fire I reach. Sometimes, alas, we “learn the same lesson over and over”—ordo we? For example, I have learned throughout many years that there is some flaw inour management of larger fires which keeps us from getting a reasonable output of held line from a crew ofa given size. Plenty of other people have learned the same thing. But, untrained aswe arein the science and art of management, we have not found ways toact satisfactorily on what we have learned. Our learning has too often failed to lead to produc­ tive action. The first essential in such matters isto grasp the need for change, the nature and importance ofa prob­ lem, the chance to introduce something better. With that fact in mind, the outline for 1938 reports on larger fires requested a record of lessons learned bythe manor men who had most todo with each fire. Some ofthe most suggestive answers received are quoted in this article. Perhaps these notes will help reduce the number of times lessons have tobe “relearned” by different men—orby the same men. Northern Region (R-1) Absaroka—Chico fire—429 acres (174ha). The fire got over the line because of incomplete mop-upand men being gathered ina bunch toget water. The foreman in charge wasa young, inexperi­ enced administrative guard who, inhis zeal tobe helpful, left his crew to help on another part ofthe line. Hadhe had more experience, he would have recognized that his crew lacked training and knowl­ edge of fire fighting, andhe would not have left them. This might also be traced tothe fact that the sector was too long for efficient handling bythe sector boss. The country wasso steep that the man in charge could not cover his whole line often enough.
For35 years I have been working onor observing suppression jobs, butI still learn something from every fire I reach. Kaniksu—Goose Creek fire—544 acres (220ha). An organization principle was violated in that authority onthe ground was divid­ ed between two heads and coordi­ nation was not effected. Two men, either qualified to handle the entire fire, were onthe job. Each assumed the other tobe in charge. Each aggressively worked on oppo­ site sides ofthe fire, expecting the other fellow tosee that balance was maintained. The men planning the attack were confronted bya fire burning very fast and throwing spot fires ahead. Fire wasin a heavy, dry, white-pine slash area which had been logged during the summer and was pushed bya 20-mile (32-km/h) wind. Itwas figured that the fire would travel ina northeasterly direction, which itdid toa certain extent, but not as fast aswas antic­ ipated. Consequently, more men were figured for the northeast side than actually needed. Ifour fore­ sight had been as good asour backsight, more men would have been placed onthe west side where there were barely enough men. Kootenai—Rocky Creek fire—380 acres (154ha). The old story that an undetected spot fire blew upand caused this tobe an extra-peri­ od fire holds true here. Inan analysis ofthe action on this fire bythe supervisor, administra­ tive assistant, two rangers, andan alternate and dispatcher who were on this fire, itwas agreed that the25 men who were searching for spot fires were sufficient under the conditions that existed atthe time of this fire. However, a spot fire got away, and caused the second run; therefore, the number ofmen orthe organization of them must have been at fault. Bulldozers were used to construct approximately three-quarters ofa mile (1.2km) of line on this fire. The main criticism wason account of some ofthe burning fuel having been covered with duff and dirt which added hours tothe time required todo the mop-upjob. The time of arrival, the rate of spread, and the size and value ofthe rapid-spread area determined the action to take. I believe a bull­ dozer line under not too difficult topographic conditions canbe con­ structed in less time than any other machine we have on hand. The cost ofmop-upis, of course, a problem, but corral isthe fist job. Because ofthe value of bulldozers, and the possibility of breakdowns, I recommend an extra machine ona fire-line construction job. California Region (R-5) Angeles—San Antonio fire— 3,270 acres (1,323ha). We were slow in completing lines on some sectors, because of using crews too large—20men per experienced crew leader. We should have (for this particular fire, andit is true in most fall fires that spread with erratic lines and many spots) used small crews, 5men to each trained fire fighter, and made sectors small enough to provide closer supervi­ sion and more effective perform­ ance. Splendid cooperation with the United States Weather Bureau in their special fire-weather forecasts during the entire fire season, and specifically during the progress of this fire, made possible a more accurate planning program for fire personnel needs and strategy tobe employed (particularly on backfire work). Records show and this fire con­ firms: Our late fall fires area prob­ lemwe have not met in southern California. Inthe absence of early rains, in September and October weget Santa Anna conditions, extremely low humidity and high wind velocities upto 50 miles per hour (80km/h). These conditions sometimes last afew days—some­ times 3 weeks. Practically all seri­ ous fires in southern California for the last 10 years have started under these conditions, indicating we have pointed our efforts tothe nor­ mal season conditions and gained much ground, but now we must point to these abnormal fall condi­ tions and plan to meet them by: 1. Study more intensively, the behavior of these late fall fires. 2. Provide a24-hour patrol and lookout service. This wasa night fire—as have been twoor three others. 3. Make more intensive useof clo­ sures regardless of private prop­ erty interests. 4. Shorten elapsed time between discovery and first action by movement of equipment and men soas to concentrate in high hazard areas and high occur­ rence zones. 5. Intensify useof secondary look­ out points. 6. Have night suppression crew on duty, dressed and ready togo.
In summary: Put additional heat The large area and rapid spread of this fire on every control effort we normal- was due entirely tothe dense and continuous ly practice for regular summer stand of “cheat grass.” season. Klamath—Red Cap fire—16,196 acres (6,554ha). The suppres­ sion action on this fire was charac­ terized by insufficient manpower and overhead inthe first five burn­ ing periods, then a sudden build­ upof menin a belated attempt to conform tothe Forester’s policy of immediate control. This sudden build-upled to placing more menin the field than could beade­ quately serviced—with consequent loss of efficiency. For example, on divisions 1and 2, zone B, it took 400 men (including camp workers, etc.) 4 days to build and backfire 404 chains (26,664 feet [8,127m]) of line. Theoretically, 400 men should have built the line in1 day, which would have been in accor­ dance with the Forester’s policy; but actually, they lost 50 percent efficiency because of lack of food and bedding; andit is estimated that about half ofthe remaining effort was dissipated intoo wide line construction, so100 men fully serviced and adequately supervised could have accomplished the same jobin the same time. The Weather Bureau fire-weather field station forecasts were used throughout the fire. The assurance of this station that certain favor­ able conditions would continue made it possible to plan and con­ struct a line into the head ofthe Red Cap Canyon, thereby saving about 4,000 acres (1,600ha) that had appeared tobe doomed. The marvelous “door die, stick tothe bitter end” spirit ofthe short- term force was magnificent. Itwas with a feeling of deepest regret that with the first big rain storm on October 1I was forced todis­ miss them with the expressed hope that they could find enough todo through the winter to come back mentally and physically fitto tack­ le another season. San Bernardino—Arrowhead fire—12,362 acres (5,003ha). The Arrowhead fire originally start­ edin a cabin onthe crest ofthe San Bernardino Mountain range. After very thorough investigation asto the cause ofthe fire, itis believed that itwas dueto faulty flue construction. The defect was believed to have been where the thimble fastened tothe brick chimney. Extreme fire weather conditions existed atthe beginning of this fire and continued throughout. A high wind was blowing at gale force, 45to 50 miles per hour (72–80km/h), and the humidity was very low, about 7 percent. The cabin in which the fire started had wooden, untreated shingles, also others that burned near this one. Dueto the high winds the burning shingles were probably the greater cause ofthe many spot fires. The rate of spread of this fire was extremely great during the first few hours. Approximately 8,000 acres (3,200ha) burned during the first 7 hours or over 1,000 acres per hour (400ha/h). Because ofthe high rate of spread itis doubtful that any means of preparedness in presuppression would have reduced the size of this particular fire. However, itwas thought that we were deficient inthe number of tank trucks avail­ able atthe beginning ofthe fire and during the fire. A tank truck at Arrowhead ranger station would be very desirable and had there been one there it would have arrived onthe fire about 7 minutes after the fire was reported instead of36 minutes aswas the case. Even though there had been a tank truck at Arrowhead ranger station, itis doubtful that it would have made any difference in this fire. Butas a presuppression lesson wecan see the importance of having favorable distribution of tank trucks. All line constructed and lost was uncompleted line. All backfire work that was done was held although it slopped over in places. Orchard torches were used. No acreage was burned through back­ firing which would not have been lost bythe fire anyway. Sequoia—Fish Hatchery fire—500 acres (200ha). Investigation shows that regardless ofany sup­ pression action taken after the crews arrived onthe fire, it could not have been controlled while still small. This fire was simply moving too fast after itgot upa headway. Itis barely possible that hadwe been able toput about 50men on this fire atthe time the first crews arrived, the fire could have been held toa small acreage. However, there wasno failure in first attack action, asthe first crew traveling 10 miles (16km), arrived 17min-
Records show and this fire confirms: the size itdid asa direct result ofOur Santa Ana fires area problem crowning through the unburned canopy onthe day following con- we have not met in southern California. trol. Past records will show that utes after the origin ofthe fire. We feel, therefore, that the only way this fire could have been prevented from becoming large would have been for the district ranger to have taken such action earlier inthe season as would have prevented the fire from starting. This might have been possible hadhe specifi­ cally designated a dumping ground for the useof the Kern Country Juvenile Camp and had this ground thoroughly fire-proofed atthe stated ofthe season. The fire wasin very rough country where night work was difficult. District Ranger Stathem now believes that it would have been better business to have reduced his night crews in size, concentrating most ofhis manpower onthe line during daylight hours. The lower fire line was built paral­ leling an oiled road andin some places within 800 feet (240m) of this road. The reason for this was that itwas believed atthe time that itwas necessary todo this to protect a high-voltage transmis­ sion line that was between the fire line and the road. Looking back on this, itis easily seen, however, that there wasan opportunity to drop back tothe road and hold the fire and also protect the transmission line with a much smaller crew, inasmuch asthe line would have been easier to hold onthe road. Shasta—Salt Creek fire—1,690 acres (684ha). The most impor­ tant lesson that I learned from this fire was that it burned more rapid­ lyat night, especially downhill, than Ihad thought possible, andas a consequence, the fire made an advance beyond the point where itwas estimated it would be held. Shasta—Big Lake fire—745 acres (301ha). The most important thing I learned on this fire was that in slash type cover one should never tryto attack the head ofa fire ifit reaches an area of more than 3 acres (1.2ha). To attack the rear first and pinch itin on both sides, putting the heaviest attack onthe side toward which the wind is blowing. Shasta—Mount Hedron fire— 8,300 acres (3,400ha). This fire originated ina grass sage–juniper fuel type in gently rolling country ata time when the wind was blow­ ing approximately 20 miles per hour (32km/h). The fire was attacked by20 men and 2 tank trucks within 11 minutes ofits origin, andat that time itwas about 3 acres (1.2ha) in size and spreading rapidly. Cooperators were immediately called upon for help, butby the time they arrived the fire was completely outof con­ trol and was heading north before a strong tail win. The action ofthe fire indicated that it probably would have been a300-acre (120-ha) fire even though there had been a full camper ofCCC enrollees at Leaf which was only 8 miles (12km) away. It seemed tobe oneof those fires that hadto make its run. Trinity—Glennison Fire—370 acres (150ha). This fire reached this isa common occurrence on fires inthe Canyon Creek areas, anda special effort had been made tomop upthe entire fire before the burning period ofthe day following control. In spite ofthe efforts of65 men with backpack pumps anda power pumper, the fire flared up from inside and crowned outin the unburned canopy of live oak. If there isany lesson tobe learned from this experience, I believe itis the necessity of having enough men with water equipment to cover the entire fire before the beginning ofthe next burning peri­ od. This isa rather difficult and costly procedure, especially when control isnot achieved before day­ light. The flare upon this fire began at12 noon, which did not allow much time to cover the entire fire. Also, itis not advisable to send men into the burn before ithas had time to cool sufficiently to allow them to work safely. Control of this fire the day follow­ ing was achieved by following the above procedure toa large extent. However, weather conditions were more favorable until the late after­ noon, which allowed more time tomop up. In summarizing the above, perhaps the most important point isto achieve control as early as possible the first night so that the fire will cool down before daylight, and allow more time for mop up. Trinity—Little Bear Wallow Fir— 2,200 acres (890ha). Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC)
enrollees are ineffective ona fire when not thoroughly trained in fire suppression, and they must be accustomed to hard hiking in rugged country and able todo effective work after arriving atthe fire. Inthe case of this fire, the ini­ tial attack was made byan experi­ enced guard and two green enrollees. The boys, who were transferred here with aNew York company aday orso previously, were soft, untrained, and not accustomed to hiking, and not only slowed down the guard’s travel time tothe fire, but were useless after arriving there. North Pacific Region (R-6) Siskiyou—Cedar Camp (Chetco) Fire—34,627 acres (14,014ha). Something must be done to stop incendiary fires from being started to keep large fires burning. Onthe division in which I worked, itis a positive fact that one fire was set, andI am relatively sure that others were setin the same area. Take the local man’s advice asto fire behav­ ior and wind drafts ifhe is reliable. Reliable local men are indispensa­ bleas scouts, especially in unfamil­ iar country. Siskiyou—Nome Fire—5,800 acres (2,300ha). Planes proved tobe an excellent means of supplying fire camps both from the stand­ point of speed and economy. Camps were serviced that otherwise would have hadto be supplied byman pack, aswas done for several days when planes were grounded, which required 8 hours of hard packing by good mento get40 pounds of supplies into camp. Planes will not eliminate the use of horses. During the time that this fire was burning the smoke became so dense the planes were grounded An important principle is that the front ofa fast running fire is often untouchable. Buta lull always comes. The job isto be sure to grab itfor keeps during that first lull. for several days, which clearly brought out the fact that pack stock must be relied upon at times. More use should be made ofthe indirect method of control on fires of this size andin this type of topography. There is always the human aversion to burned area that is continually cropping upon fires of this kind.* Men work too close tothe fire, thus sacrificing time and labor. More satisfactory results canbe obtained by drop­ ping back and taking advantage of natural breaks in topography. A stream, unless itis large and clear of brush, makes a poor fire line. The variable winds upand down streams, the possibility of rolling logs and falling snags, and the rapid spread ofa fire upthe sloe once it crosses a stream, makes it exceedingly dangerous touse. Fremont—Bonanza Fire—9,155 acres (3,705ha). The large area and rapid spread of this fire was due entirely tothe dense and con­ tinuous stand of “cheat grass” (Bromus tectorum) with very little timber overstory. Consequently, the usual “forest” fire standards are not fully applicable. However, the following was learned about this particular country. * Editor’s note: American Indians routinely used fire for natural resource management, a practice that some European settlers adapted to their needs. Butby the 1930s, the culture of fire control wasso deeply ingrained that “aversion to burned area” seemed quin­ tessentially “human.” 1. Must keep roads cleared as fire breaks. 2. Must construct additional cross roads. 3. Must make definite plans for suppression (outline prepared). 4. Overhead, in general, needs more “mopup” training. 5. CCC enrollees must be shown “how” by fire foremen and straw bosses. 6. On very large fires itis better touse machinery for trench con­ struction atthe sacrifice of some acreage than to depend on hand work too close tothe fires. Investigation ofthe cause of break- over on August 26 showed that while a good trench and clean burn had been obtained onthe extreme southeast corner ofthe fire, and mop uphad been carried back ofthe line an adequate dis­ tance for ordinary circumstances, the crowning ofa small green pine tree ona low ridge about 300 feet (90m) inside the line threw sparks into the thick cheat grass and juniper timber which quickly crowned and spread under the brisk breeze. Men working inthe vicinity ofthe break took action almost immediately, but were unable to cope with the heat ofthe crowning junipers and did not have time touse the indirect method. Rocky Mountain Region (R-2) Roosevelt—Jenny Lind Fire—664 acres (269ha). I believe the most
To summarize, itis apparent that extreme effort should be made to satisfy the requirements ofthe Forester’s policy asto control inthe early burning stages. entirely too narrow for safety in handling backfiring in windy weather. [Importance of training in judgment again emphasized. More common error isto make fire lines wider than need befor important point tobe noted isthe great difficulty of insuring ade­ quate initial action ona very aggressive fire inits initial stages. [Three miners, 100 feet (30m) away, saw fire and attacked it5 minutes after it started. District ranger with one man arrived at fire 35 minutes after it started. But larger crews did not reach fire in time to prevent 39- to54-mile (63–87km) wind from starting fire onits first run. Probably most important lesson tobe learned is that ona forest not provided with regular detection and other facili­ ties common to western fire forests, a fire starting in slash ina gale of wind could beand was stopped at664 acres (269ha). –Ed.] Almost uniformly there was too much tendency to bury burning material along the fireline in such away that it only prolonged the burning and the mop-up period. The correct useof dirt has been so much emphasized that there are few ifany ofthe foremen ignorant ofthe undesirability of partially burying heavy material; but there seemed tobe great difficulty in getting thus particular fault cor­ rected. A common fault which was per­ haps the most serious was that of inclosing ragged fire perimeter inside a line without taking any measures to clean burn. This needs tobe given a great deal of emphasis onall forests. Southwestern Region (R-3) Gila—Lookout Ridge Fire—575 acres (233ha). Class 6 burning conditions prevailed and were not recognized. The fuels were very dry and the wind was strong. The lesson learned here is that a fire danger station would have fur­ nished a definite check on burning conditions, and this could then have been promptly followed by proper strengthening ofthe guard force to meet class 6or emergency conditions. [This forest isnow sup­ plied with a fully equipped station. Danger stations and danger ratings are designed to avoid just this sort of failure to recognize changes in fire danger. –Ed.] Poor line location due primarily to trying to hold fire toa minimum acreage with subsequent loss of excess acreage wasan important factor. This is merely a matter of training in suppression. [Yes, but training in judgment, which isthe most difficult and most backward field of training. –Ed.] Gila—Iron Creek Fire—2,318 acres (938ha). Here again class 6 burning conditions existed unrec­ ognized. Too much line was lost by working too close tothe fire. [Understand that this fire and this weakness were used bythe region for training bythe case method. –Ed.] Width of fire lines must be governed by (a) fuel on ground; (b) steepness of slope; (c) wind veloci­ ty. Inthe past, fire lines have been backfiring. –Ed.] Intermountain Region (R-4) Wasatch—Shepherd Creek Fire— 960 acres (388ha). Particularly significant is that the fire, carried bya high wind, spread over 700 acres (280ha) within 2 hours after it started. It traveled so fast that the fire truck, plow unit, and men could not keep pace. Forty men were onthe fire within 20 minutes after it started, and, with our fire truck which suppressed a mile (3.2km) of fire edge, and the plow unit that made over 3,000 feet (900m) of fire line, itwas impossible to cope with the high rate of fire spread. [But the wind dropped and the fire died down, after which the crews hada chance and did not muff it. An important principle is that the front ofa fast running fire is often untouchable. Buta lull always comes. The job isto be sure to grab itfor keeps during that first lull. –Ed.] Southern Region (R-8) Conecuh—“Big Fire”—576 acres (233ha). Inthe attack on this fire, asin most other fires onthe Conecuh, (wire-grass type of ground cover), everything depend­ ed upon the success or failure ofthe tank truck. From the time of attack with this truck until the water supply was exhausted (15 minutes) 19 chains (1,056 feet [321m]) of line were built. A reor­ ganization has been made topro­ vide for replenishment ofthe sup­ plyof water for the tank truck.
A whirlwind picked up burning The most important lesson that I learned material from asfar as100 yards from this fire was that it burned more rapidly (90m) inside the line and dropped at night, especially downhill, it outside inthe rough, resulting immediately ina break-over of than Ihad thought possible. large proportions. Onat least two occasions whirlwinds hit the fire line while suppression was being carried on with tank trucks, resulting in loss of sort lengths of line and excessive useof water. Variability of wind direction and prevalence of whirlwinds are fac­ tors not ordinarily considered in danger rating. Evidence indicates there was time to have cuta line and backfired across the head. This would have speeded up control and promised better chance of holding toa smaller acreage. Conecuh—Bradley Fire—792 acres (321ha). There isa definite need fora mobile tractor-plow suppression unit, capable of rapid­ ly plowing a line from which back­ firing, could be done. This type of equipment appears to offer the only practicable means for stop­ ping the head ofthe occasional bad fire short of natural breaks. The relative humidity onthe dayof the fire (December 3) did not reach a point that could be called low. This shows that relative humidity, in itself, cannot be relied upon asan indicator of fire danger. Ocala—Pleasant Flat Fire—2,161 acres (875ha). The ground ofthe timber type through which this fire burned is generally cov­ ered with water during periods of normal weather, but dries out sev­ eral times a year so that it becomes inflammable. Since itis not very accessible by tank trucks, the construction of permanent meandering 8-foot (2.4-m) fire­ breaks onthe higher ground with­ inthe type will prove very helpful in suppression ofany future fires which may occur. Summarizing, I would say that the most important thing this fire showed was the inability ofthe ranger to make efficient useof the manpower and equipment that was available atthe time ofthe fire. The matters ofnew and better equipment are secondary. [The ranger may take comfort from the fact that many others, including big shots in fire control, suffer from the same inability—but this should not deter him from seeking tobe mentally prepared for effi­ cient management ofthe next fire. –Ed.] Kisatchie—Slash fire—407 acres (165ha). Two hundred and ten acres (85ha) ofthe fire had only recently been planted to slash pine. The slash pine of course was totally destroyed. The rough was com­ posed of wire grass, broomsedge, anda fairly heavy carpet of hard­ wood leaves. The rough wasof 5 years’ accumulation, and can be considered heavy for longleaf type. Investigation revealed that the fire was handled very well bythe look­ out men and the dispatcher. The discovery, report, and getaway times are excellent. However, the decision ofthe superintendent to send only 6men with the junior foreman ina pickup to check onthe fire was sadly at fault. The day was not an extremely bad one; however, a fresh south wind was blowing and any fire located within a quarter ora half mile (0.4–0.8km) south ofthe boundary certain­ ly should have merited both the fire truck (tank truck and Panama pump) anda full 16-man crew with the standard fire-fighting tool box. Ifthe junior foreman had had a full 16-man crew and fire truck he would have unquestionably held the fire with only an acre (0.4ha) orso of national forest land burned. DeSoto—Saucier Fire—635 acres (257ha). The weather conditions made the hazard extreme. There had been no rain for3 days. The relative humidity was33 at noon. Wind velocity varied from 8to 16 miles per hour (13–26km/h) dur­ ing the fire. The ground cover was broomsedge grass. The flames hada range of40 to60 feet (12–18m), crowning at times and spotting ahead. Instructions were to backfire from a fire lane onthe west side. This firebreak had been constructed 2 years ago and had not been main­ tained since this time. Asa result, itwas grown over and offered no effective barrier from which to backfire. The extreme weather conditions made it improbable that even ifthe firebreak had been recently maintained, the crew would have been able to hold their backfire on this narrow line.
A whirlwind picked up burning material from asfar as100 yards inside the line and dropped it outside inthe rough, resulting immediately ina break-over of large proportions. DeSoto—Hell Hole Creek Fire— 509 acres (206ha). This fire emphasized how immediate and continued work onthe flanks ofa large fire can keep the acreage toa minimum and prevent new heads from forming when the wind shifts. Crews worked the flanks continual­ lyso that when the head was final­ ly stopped the entire fire was cor­ ralled within a very few minutes. The head of this fire presented a wall of flames 20 feet high (6m), with a range of30 to40 feet (9–12m). Itwas burning ina 5-year rough. Several ofthe fire fighters had narrow escapes while attempt­ ingto stop the head. Two different pump men were forced to abandon their pumps in order to outrun the fire. This fire, as well as other large ones onthe DeSoto, shows that in extreme weather conditions a great deal depends onthe dispatcher’s judgment in placing crews, not only for the head but for work onthe flanks. The speed at which these fires travel offers little oppor­ tunity to correct tactical mistakes onthe fire line. North Central Region (R-7) Gardner—Tower Fire—489 acres (198ha). This was one ofa series of25 fires burning onthe district on this date. The fire danger was class 6and the wind velocity was20 miles per hour (32km/h). The fire spread rapidly in highly inflammable leaf and grass fuel. Topography was rugged with steep slopes, which accelerated the rate of spread. Winds shifted frequently and small whirlwinds occurred along the fire front. Asa result the fire hada number of heads, with one traveling along the top of each main ridge. The fire advanced ina solid sheet of flame, leaping 6 feet (2m) high in most places, and the men could not get near the fire because ofthe intense heat. Spot fires, jumping in many cases over 100 feet (30m) ahead ofthe main fire, were common. There was2 to3 years accumulation of leaves onthe area. When Assistant Ranger Barry arrived, he took charge ofthe fire immediately. He made a quick size-upof the situation, deter­ mined that direct attack was inef­ fective [Ithad already failed. –Ed.], and directed the crews to drop back several hundred feet from the fire edge to construct line. The technique used, which consisted of raking a line and backfiring from it, was considered satisfactory under the circumstances. This dropping back was essential because whirlwind conditions caused fires to spot 100to 200 feet (30–60) ahead ofthe main fire. Knowing the conditions asare known now, fire management could have been improved by back­ firing from the truck trail and keeping the fire from crossing it. However, the use of this technique would have required at least 25 additional menas there were sepa­ rate heads traveling toward the road. The general belief that all fires in Missouri hardwoods canbe han­ dled by direct or parallel methods is false. On certain days, conditions are such that the only practical method isto drop back to natural or cultural barriers, such asthe road in this case, and sacrifice some burned acreage in order to insure control. A more extensive useof water should be resorted toon such days. On this fire three men could not control a5-foot (1.5-m) spot fire byuse of rakes. A marine pump would have saved the first line built on this fire. ■
L ESSONS FROM L ARGER F IRES ONN ATIONAL F ORESTS , 1939* Roy Headley Editor’s note: Roy Headley took the “lessons learned” from field The Chestnut Ridge fire showed that weather reports on “larger fires” (fires cov­ conditions may rapidly change during early spring, ering more than 300 acres [121 and that the field organization ha]) inthe Eastern, Southern, and North-Central Regions. He indicat- must be kept onits toes. edthe source following each report. His own summaries and comments are indicated by brack­ ets and the italicized notation “–Ed.” Eastern Region (R-9) George Washington—Chestnut Ridge Fire—872 acres (353ha). This fire on March 9, under very serious burning conditions, was probably caused by children living inthe vicinity. The fire caught the preparedness organization ofthe district napping. Towers were not manned. Weather stations and dis­ trict fire truck notin operation, and the district ranger notin touch with his dispatcher. Failure to recognize emergency conditions andto build organization onthe basis of emergency conditions results in fires of this class. Once organized the suppression action was satisfactory. However, because of lack of preparedness it required 3-1/2 hours toget the suppression organization tothe fire. The result wasa large fire, and the lessons learned byall con­ cerned are that regardless of previ­ ous weather, conditions may When this article was originally published, Roy Headley headed the Division of Fire Control, USDA Forest Service, Washington, DC. * The article isan abridged version ofan article pub­ lished in Fire Control Notes 4(1) [Winter 1940]: 15–17. change very rapidly during the early spring, and that the field organization must be kept onits toes. –Unsigned forest report A complete failure of district ranger to recognize degree of fire danger and plan accordingly. Corrective action has been taken. The most valuable lesson in this case involves the continuous daily useof fire-weather stations to determine degree of danger follow­ ing rain. Very rapid changes involv­ ing only afew hours from nodan­ gerto high danger areto be expected during March, April, and May. –R.M. Evans, regional forester Southern Region (R-8) De Soto, Leaf River District— Plantation No. 24 Fire—1,682 acres (681ha). [When discovered 5 minutes after known time ofori­ gin, this incendiary grass fire was3 acres (1.2ha). Report and get­ away took 5 minutes. Three miles (4.8km) of auto travel, 10 minutes. When reached bythe first crew of17 men, 20 minutes after origin, the fire was20 acres (9ha). Butit burned 1,682 acres (681ha), including 870 acres (352ha) of plantation, before itwas corralled 10 hours and25 minutes after origin. Inone place, wind velocity is reported as2 to19 miles (3.2–31km/h); in another, 25to 38 miles (40-61km/h). Five days since last rain of0.28 inch (0.71cm). Number of chains per man hour, 2.3 (152 feet [46.3m]). Much confusion and disorganization onthe line. Maximum number ofmen engaged, 65. –Ed.] The initial tac­ tics used bythe fire boss were cor­ rect for this fire, and had the heavy equipment functioned properly, the fire would have been held to less than 100 acres (40ha). De Soto, Leaf River District—Leaf No. 35 Fire—416 acres (168ha). [Fire was75 acres (30ha) when discovered 2 hours and17 minutes after guessed time of origin. It spread 25 acres (10ha) during the53 minutes required for report, get-away, and the travel. –Ed.] Low visibility accounts for the size of fire when discovered. There were five sets and the purpose ofthe fire wasto provide sheep range. The exposed ridge site and high winds made suppression diffi­ cult. A fire usually occurs in this location about the same time each year. Next year itis planned to patrol these areas closely inan effort to prevent the fire or catch the incendiary. –V.B. McNaughton, fire assistant
The lesson from the Ludlow fire It does not hold, however, that this procedure canbe followed onall isto promptly investigate if there is smokes, the number and places ofany doubt inthe mind ofa dispatcher or occurrence making this prohibi­ towerman asto the location ofa smoke. tive. De Soto, Biloxi Ranger District— University No. 28 Fire—1,238 acres (501ha). [Another grass, stockman, incendiary fire but with only one set. This time the lookout man snapped in with discovery within 4 minutes after guessed time of origin, when the probable area was one-tenth acre (0.04ha). But report took 42 minutes. Inthe 65 minutes required for report, get-away, and9 miles (14km) auto travel, the fire spread to350 acres (140ha). Wind velocity reported as13 to18 miles per hour (21–29km/h) when fire was first reached and during biggest run. –Ed.] De Soto, Biloxi Ranger District— Camp Branch No. 16 Fire—419 acres (170ha). On this fire, ifthe one-half ton pick-up which was equipped with a Panama pump and55 gallons (208L) of water had not bogged down, a successful attack could undoubtedly have been made onthe head. –V.B. McNaughton, fire assistant. [Illustrating why Region 8is interested in four-wheel drive trucks. –Ed.] The fire was not scouted andno one reached the head until ithad burned into the forks ofthe creek about 1 mile (1.6km) south of where the initial attack was made. This fire illustrates what happens when the initial action on fires in this country is wrong. The climatic conditions and fuel types favor an extremely rapid rate of spread on practically allof our fires, andit is imperative that weget a crew onthe head ofthe fire as soon aspos­ sible. For this reason we dispatch a small crew ona “hot shot” pick-upand follow this unit with a20-man crew. The small crew, upon reach­ ing the fire should goto the head and take whatever action is neces­ sary to check it. AsI seeit, there are only two possible conditions present; either (1) they can hold the head by direct attack, or, (2) they can’t. Inthe latter case, their only alternative isto backfire against the head and depend onthe follow-up crew to handle the flanks. Bienville—Ludlow Fire No. 20— 1,056 acres (427ha). [The report shows that the fire started one-half mile (0.8km) outside the bound­ ary. Discovered at10 acres (4ha), 1 hour and14 minutes after guessed time of origin, and reported todis­ patcher. But report time is45 hours and6 minutes. Hence, with 5 minutes get-away time and1 hour and5 minutes for4 miles (6.4km) travel on foot, a total of46 hours and16 minutes elapsed from discovery to arrival. The fire was 500 acres (200ha) when reached. Itdid not enter the forest until the second day after it start­ ed. –Ed.] Itis known at this time that a crew should have been dispatched tothe smoke shortly following discovery. Itis planned to adopt a policy of closer investigation of doubtful smokes on days of poor visibility when no crossing-outis possible, even atthe risk of increasing the false-alarm cost. Better a false alarm than a600-acre (240-ha) fire! Every fire training meeting orcon­ ference stresses the need of exer­ cising good judgment inall phases of fire control. Itis a little unfortu­ nate that this qualification must attend an individual’s every action in fire control. Very often, certain action which has merited commen­ dation because ofits practical application in hundreds of previous cases, falls down ina particular case, and the cry “poor judgment” is raised and not altogether unjus­ tifiably, as with this fire. The lesson tobe learned from the Ludlow fire is definitely this, inmy opinion: “Where the slightest doubt exists inthe mind ofa dis­ patcher or towerman asto the location ofa smoke, because of poor visibility orany other reason, prompt investigative action should take place. Although itwas known that debris burning was being done inthe affected area, too great a chance was taken on these particu­ lar hazardous days tolet a smoke of this nature, never definitely located until the third day, go uninvestigated. Outof this lesson should come an unqualified policy of action on smokes which literally cry out: “I need investigating!” ■
L ESSONS OFTHE MCVEY FIRE , B LACK H ILLS N ATIONAL F OREST * A.A. Brown Editor’s note: Early issues of Fire Control Notes often prefaced arti­ cles with substantive remarks bythe journal’s editors. A.A. Brown’s article onthe McVey Fire isa good example, with a preface long enough to stand onits own (see the sidebar). The heading under which this must be written, and its implied purpose, impose an automatic cen­ sorship onits contents. A lesson in fire control tobe of interregional interest should introduce some­ thing new, or should at least give new emphasis to principles orto aspects of their application that have not yet been fully learned. Whether ornot any experience qualifies on either of these two counts depends onthe class of individual. McVey Fire A list ofthe lessons learned bythe Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) boys onthe McVey fire would have a very different content from the list that would be most appropriate for their foremen. Similarly, some ofthe lessons learned by members ofthe supervisors’ staffs ofthe Barney and Black Hills Forests would sound trite toa southern California fire fighter, although other features ofthe job might have considerable thought-provok­ ing challenge to outsiders. When this article was originally published, A.A. Brown was head of Fire Control for the USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Region. * The article is reprinted from Fire Control Notes 4(2) [Spring 1940]: 63–67. Making a pretty complete kill on22,000 acres of highly productive country, the McVey fire was easily the worst fire ofthe 1939 year. The following comments represent an attempt to sort out experiences ofthe McVey fire from which les­ sons maybe drawn that areof interest to officers concerned with fire-control strategy onbig fires. For the most part they donot rep­ resent anything newin principles of fire control. The McVey fire itself wasa confla­ gration in flashy fuels, in rolling topography, with variable winds. This combination is designed to test the resources ofany fire boss. Rates of forward spread on wide fronts upto 120 chains (7,920 feet [2,414m]) per hour occurred. Direction of spread varied, and rate of increase in terms of acreage burned went as high as2,900 acres (1,200ha) per hour during the run of Tuesday, July 11. The cover type ofthe whole area was ponderosa pine, interspersed with small meadows. Over two-thirds ofthe area burned consisted of thinned stands of ponderosa pine, in which the thinning slash formed acon­ tinuous layer of fuel of varying density and stages of decay, dating from 1933. Although this fire reached a total area of22,000 acres (8,900ha), itwas controlled asa second-period fire with a total of46 miles (74km) of held line. Because ofthe blow-upon July 11, only 10 miles (16.1km) of line were still held by8 p.m. of that day. The additional 36 miles (58km) were built inone work period, from 8p.m. Tuesday night to9:15a.m. Wednesday. The rate at which the fire burned out was remarkable fora timber fire. Once the entire perimeter was con­ trolled, the whole area went cold almost overnight. This seems to have been due, ina large part, tothe absence of heavy dry material, tothe burning out done onall fire lines, andto the extreme heat pro­ duced bythe slash onthe ground. The lessons tobe learned from this fire for the local organization have the usual and familiar character of lessons in fire strategy, in organi­ zation, in speed of attack, in meth­ odsof attack, andin fire preven­ tion and preparedness. Allof these have been discussed at some length, and most of them on which itwas agreed that something defi­ nite and constructive could be done locally have been duly listed inthe conclusions ofthe Board of Fire Review. For the most part, they will notbe repeated here, butan attempt will be made togo back a little further ina consideration ofthe significance of facts brought outby fires such as this one.
Inadequate Theory Oneof the first things that seems important to recognize isthe inad­ equacy of existing fire-fighting methods to meet and overcome all kinds of fires. A1-acre (0.4-ha) fire maybe only a smoldering spot orit may already beas dynamic asa small tornado. Most ofour theory of fire-control tactics is based ona two-dimension idea, and the control ofa fire is usually pictured asthe solution ofa problem in plane geometry. It Editors’ Preface toA.A. Brown Article Making a pretty complete kill on work-period policy. But about 11 over 3.3 miles (5.3km) of front 22,000 acres (8,900ha) of highly p.m. the wind freshened a little asof 6p.m. onthe first day. The productive country, where every and the fire marched out author’s figure of10 miles (16.1 cubic foot of timber that canbe through the unworked gapof km) to build asof 6p.m. evident- grown is needed to sustain the “less than half a mile [0.8km]” ly considers expected spread after dependent communities, the and started a spread which was that time, but does not include McVey fire was easily the worst not corralled until 34 hours the6.9 miles (11.1km) of line or fire ofthe 1939 year. To find and later. edge asof 6p.m. which wasin follow through the clues leading the same place at9 a.m. the next to increasing mastery of such The surge ofthe fire at about 11 morning. fires offers the sharpest possible p.m. the first day was the result challenge to fire-control stu­ of recognizable causes orit was Output of held line upto the dents. Such losses are intolera­ not. Canwe discover why this completion ofthe final control ble, butit will take more than and similar fires behave the way line was0.1 chain (7 feet [2.1our usual insight and methods of they did? Whether, like a rattler, m]) per man-hour_which again study to find out why they occur. they actually gave a warning falls within our semistandard of When we find the answers, it will which we might learn to recog­ 0.06to 0.16of a chain (4to 11 take more than our usual forms nize in future before itis too feet [1.2–3.3m]) per man-hour. of training toget the essential late? No figure is available on lost principles of control so embed- line. dedin the minds of enough men Fire Perimeter that these principles will be Control Spot Fire Problem applied in future crises. The data submitted by Staff Spotting was naturally very bad. Breaking the Rules Technician Skinner shows that at6 p.m. onthe first day, 5-1/2Can’twe develop better ideas for dealing with spot fires? Asa sim- At11 p.m., 9 hours after the hours after discovery and4 ple example, how can weget arrival ofthe first 68men onthe hours and40 minutes after mento watch and comb the fire, those in charge recognized arrival ofthe first cooperator places where spot fires may start for the first time that they “were crew, the fire hada perimeter of instead of watching the fire from up against a fire that wouldn’t10.2 miles (16.4km) (including a which the sparks come? Sounds act according to rule.” The fire 25-percent addition toa machine easy, doesn’tit? had spread less than 250 acres count ofmap miles). Of this (100ha) inthe previous 5 hours total, 4.6 miles (7.4km) were in Before the first crew arrived, two and had reached a total ofthe same location as when the post cutters working nearby saw approximately 1,600 acres (650 fire was finally corralled_mostly and tried to stop this fire. They ha). Wind from 7to 10p.m. hadon or close to roads, fields, and tailed and had difficulty in escap­ been “nearly imperceptible.” prairies; and2.3 miles were held ing. They were suspected of Completion ofthe control line in until 9a.m. the next morning. starting the fire, butit was later the early morning hours The spread from 6p.m. ofthe proved tobe a hang-over light­ “appeared certain” long before first dayto 9a.m. ofthe second ning fire. the time required bythe first day came, therefore, from not
seems tome that this type of Nine hours after arrival onthe fire, thinking has carried over too far those in charge recognized for the first time into ideas of application onthe job that they “were up against a fire so that the experienced fire fore­ man himself comes nearer toa full that wouldn’tact according to rule.” realization ofthe potentialities ofa given fire inthe third dimension than does theso-called fire-control expert. This of course, sums upto our inability to cope with crown fires. Itis nota new subject butit has been rather studiously ignored in discussions of fire fighting. Certainly, this one factor looms large inthe history ofthe McVey fire. Missed Opportunity Assuming that nothing could be done during the height ofthe spread of this fire through the crowns, there were lulls during which it might have been con­ trolled if certain things could have been done quickly enough. These “ifs” comprise debatable points from which some lessons maybe drawn. During the first afternoon and evening, from 6p.m. to11 p.m., the fire dropped outof the crowns and stayed relatively quiet. There were 10 miles (16.1km) of fire line to build, which itwas expected would be complete by2 a.m. Asit turned out, this would have been completed, probably by midnight, but the blow-upat 11p.m. with less than one-half mile (0.8km) of line still to build resulted in losing nearly all that had been accomplished. A plan of attack designed to complete the job before 11p.m. might have saved the day. Ithas long been realized that itis unsafe to stake everything onthe assumption that a fire will slow down at night. Yet fires doso so commonly that both the forester’sand the regional policy are based on overnight action which is judged tobe adequate ona big fire if sufficient manpower and facili­ ties are mobilized to control a more or less static fire perimeter before 10a.m. ofthe next day. Onthe McVey fire, forest officers allowed themselves a large safety margin, butas it turned out, not enough, since they did not foresee the critical necessity ofa safe perimeter that could be held against all odds by11 p.m. ofthe first night. Regardless ofhow feasible such an accomplishment might have been on this particular fire, it, of course, presents a very real question inthe case of future fires. Will it ever be possible to predict the behavior ofan exceptional fire far enough in advance to insure the exceptional intensity of attack required? Ways in which Region 2 officers believe such foresight might be improved are: Through improved fire-danger ratings, improved fire-weather forecasting, and through better recognition of potentialities of local fuel hazards. Unsound Strategy The next lesson of critical import and perhaps the one of most con­ structive value ofall is that ofthe strategy of control inan aggressive fire such as this. Although the main head or heads ofthe fire took one direction, then another, during its run, prevailing winds and past experience with such fires in this locality have revealed that the odds are four toone that the greatest conflagration threat will beto country tothe east and northeast ofthe fire. This was well known, yet the timing of control effort was such that the most northerly and westerly extensions ofthe fire were the last tobe controlled. Asa result the blow-up here flanked all the hard-won control line tothe east. This wasa question of judgment atthe time and not as obvious a fail­ ureas itmay sound in review. The worst fuels and the most aggressive head ofthe fire were given first attention, and the hardest part ofthe fight seemed already won when the fire made its new drive north­ ward onits west flank. This exten­ sion set the stage for the final run eastward ona front of conflagra­ tion proportions. The west flank ofthe fire had already burned outto a wide expanse of noninflammable grassland which gave a strategic advantage. Had the progression of safe-control line been entirely from the grassland eastward along the north flank and from the complet­ ed south line northwestward along the east flank, the investment in fire-control line would have been better protected against loss and the same blow-up with the same amount of uncontrolled perimeter farther east at11 p.m. would have been far less disastrous, in terms of both a narrower new head and less lost line.
Forces were reorganized anda fresh ing the main fire. But when the two met they seemed to “bounce” attack was made—a sound strategy, right back through the unburned but its execution failed from circumstances crowns toward the fire line without which may also carry some lessons. any noticeable drop in intensity. This lesson in importance of sound strategy would not have become apparent atall had the fire remained quiet an hour longer orhad the fresh crews scheduled for this sector been the first to arrive and start work instead ofthe last. Similarly, more manpower or increased efficiency in line con­ struction, sufficient to complete all control line before 11p.m., might have resulted in success with the timing used. Failed Execution After the fire had made its run northward another lull occurred between the hours of2 and7 a.m. ofthe morning following. Forces were reorganized anda fresh attack was made during this period which carried considerable promise of success in spite ofa greatly increased perimeter. In this case little fault canbe found with the strategy planned, but its execution failed from circumstances which may also carry some lessons. The critical sector ofthe new line was being pushed rapidly from both ends by experienced fire fore­ men using the one-lick method and burning their line clean as they went. Follow-up crews were organized to guard the hot line andto control spot fires. The latter failed to accomplish this. Noone knows exactly why, except that this job turned outto befar more exacting and required far more supervision and more ingenuity and action than did the construc­ tion ofa reasonably safe control line alone. Both on this occasion andat other times during the fire the rate of production ofa reason­ ably acceptable control line, including burning out, did not rep­ resent the rate at which the fire was being controlled. This raises a question of tactics where fire line is being built rapid­ ly. The job of holding the line built calls for far more than is implied by either the term patrol ormop- up. It represents ona fast-running fire a desperate defense action, since the advance crew cannot wait tosee the fire finally die down behind it, but must pass onto the follow-up crews the responsibility of making good the advantage gained. When 2to 3 miles (3–5km) of such line is handed toa sec­ tor boss he must drastically change the approved method of organizing the job, which was based onmop­ ping upa dying fire edge. Apparently this was not well enough done. The conclusion then is that organization of crews must be handled ona very different basis than the conventional mop-upor patrol action when fire line isput in rapidly byan advance crew orby mechanical means. A further experience onthe McVey fire that was baffling to sector bosses was the tendency of back­ fires to spread inward toward the oncoming crown fire inthe surface litter just as intended, andto go into the crowns just before reach- This did not always occur but hap­ pened so often asto make backfir­ ing ineffective at close range and very risky at longer distances. Apparently the nature and force ofthe convection drafts isthe decid­ ing factor. Itis a challenge to back­ firing theory and strategy. Challenges to Theory and Practice Outof these experiences there maybe resolved several points of chal­ lenge to existing fire-fighting theo­ ryand practices. These points, rather than the lessons discussed, will be listed inthe form of ques­ tions. 1. How can forest fire-fighting the­ ory and practice take better account of fire asa force tobe dealt with which varies asa problem not only with the area involved but also with the vary­ ing rate at which heat units are being released and with the con­ vection forces being generated? 2. How can the requirements of successful control action for each individual fire be predicted more successfully? 3. What principles of fire-control strategy canbe defined and set upfor general application? 4. What changes in crew organiza­ tion should be adopted to insure holding long stretches of fire- control line built rapidly along the perimeter ofan active fire? 5. How can the use of backfiring be reduced toa dependable practice in combating crown fires? ■
ANA NALYSIS OFTHE H ONEY FIRE * C.F. Olsen Original editor’s note: Although the Honey Fire occurred almost 2 years ago the following analysis is published because ofits value to other fire control personnel. The data were gathered by research personnel who were present throughout the period ofthe fire and who were free from any sup­ pression duties. A “Board of Fire Review” held bythe regional forester in 1938 brought out addi­ tional information and criticisms which were furnished tothe Southern Forest Experiment Station for its study. Employees ona south-bound freight train in north-central Louisiana carelessly disposed ofa piece of burning waste from ahot boxon a crisp January morning in 1938. The bit of flame landed in dead grass atthe edge ofthe tracks inside the boundaries ofthe Kisatchie National Forest; 30min­ utes later this small flame had grown into a forest fire with a perimeter of almost 4 miles (6.4km) and had spread almost 2 miles (3.2km) with the wind from the point of origin. A crew of four men, assigned bythe Southern Forest Experiment Station to studies in fire behavior, wason the scene within 3 minutes after its start andan unusually complete record of this fire, including its rate of When this article was originally published, C.F. Olsen wasa forester for the USDA Forest Service, Southern Forest Experiment Station, Asheville, NC. * The article is reprinted from Fire Control Notes 5(4) [Fall 1941]: 161–178. Fires ofthe extreme intensity and rate of spread ofthe Honey Fire inthe longleaf/slash pine type are the exception rather than the rule. spread and resistance to control, was obtained.** This fire record will be discussed and analyzed in detail with three objectives: 1. To indicate the rate of spread and behavior of fires burning under extremely critical condi­ tions. 2. To describe the action that was taken to suppress the fire. 3. Touse the experience gained from this fire asa guide in plan­ ning the action tobe taken on other fires burning under simi­ lar circumstances. Location The Honey Fire, briefly described by Headley (1939), was known locally also asthe Dyson Creek Fire. It occurred inthe center ofthe Catahoula District ofthe Kisatchie National Forest. The fire started along the east side ofa rail­ road right-of-way1-1/2 miles (2.4km) north of Bentley, a small set­ tlement approximately 15 miles ** In order to obtain better data, the forest supervisor had previously agreed that the members of this crew were relieved ofany obligation to assist in fire suppres­ sion. Usually they were in effect dispatched with the regular suppression crew; in this instance they hap­ pened onthe fire at about the time itwas reported. They were criticized for not trying to control it; but with two fences anda railroad between them and the fire, there isno doubt that their truck was unusable on this fire. Itwas very definitely too big for them to hold with hand tools alone. (24km) north of Alexandria, head­ quarters ofthe forest supervisor. The central tower ofthe ranger district, the Catahoula Tower, is located 1-1/2 miles (2.4km) east of Bentley. The highways, railroad, firebreaks, and other physical improvements onthe fire area are shown onthe accompanying maps. The area is typical of open cut-over longleaf pine land inthe Upper Coastal Plain. The topography ranges from flat to gently rolling, with occasional depressions ofwet and boggy land. Several small creek bottoms occur onthe area, but because they arein general very narrow, they contribute little or nothing as natural barriers to fast-spreading fires. The principal fuel inthe area is grass, broomsedge (Andropogon sp.) being predominant. Other compo­ nents ofthe fuel are various herba­ ceous plants, pine needles and cones, and hardwood leaves. Approximately 150 acres (60ha) covered by this fire were burned over on February 21, 1935. The remainder ofthe area, or about 950 acres (384ha), had been unburned forat least 6 years. Inasmuch asall ofthe area had been unburned for3 years or longer and the site is better than average, a uniform and extremely heavy stand of grass covered the
entire area and contributed markedly tothe intensity ofthe fire. Also scattered residual seed trees and some reproduction were present inthe western half ofthe area and the eastern half supported moderately well stocked stands of longleaf pine saplings, light to heavy stands of blackjack oak, and open grass. Following the 1935 fire, 20-foot-wide (6-m-wide) dri­ vable firebreaks were constructed over portions ofthe area. An858­ acre (347-ha) plantation of slash pine was established bythe Forest Service inthe center ofthe burned area during the 1936–37 planting season. Allof the burned area lies within the national-forest protection boundary, but only the east half is national-forest land, the remainder being privately owned. Weather Conditions The weather conditions that pre­ vailed inthe region immediately before the fire started andon the2 previous days are shown in table 1. Since this fire was mapped for rate of spread in connection with a study of fire behavior and the recording of current weather data wasan integral part of that study, weather records were made, begin­ ning shortly after the start ofthe fire. The factors measured were relative humidity (bya hand-oper­ ated psychrometer), air tempera­ ture, wind movement, wind direc­ tion, and sky condition. General notes also were made. Wind move­ ment was taken at1-minute inter­ vals with a portable anemometer developed bythe California Forest and Range Experiment Station. This instrument consisted ofa Byram-type fan anemometer rest­ ingon a universal joint and mounted ona tripod. The instru­ ment was placed a sufficient dis­ tance from the fire tobe unaffected bythe drafts and currents created during rapid combustion. The anemometer was set with the spin­ dle3-1/2 feet (1.1m) above the ground, the standard height for measuring wind velocity inall studies of rate of spread. A record ofthe average and maxi­ mum wind velocity, relative humidity, air temperature, and fuel and soil moisture content (based ondry weight) is presented in table 2. Table 1—Weather conditions preceding the Honey Fire (observations made at Catahoula Tower). Date Temperature Rainfall Sky condition Wind Visibility Max. Min. Amount Time Direction Rate Jan. 2373 °F62 °F0.93 inches Noon– 6p.m. Cloudy South Light Poor Jan. 2466 °F48 °F0 — Cloudy and threatening SW–NW Moderate Poor (3 miles) Jan. 25a 42 °F — 0 — Clear NW Moderate Good a. 10a.m. Table 2—Record of weather, fuel moisture, and soil moisture conditions during Honey Fire. Period Wind velocity (mph) Time Relative humidity (%) Air temp. (°F) Time Moisture content (% dry weight) Avg. Max. Fuel Soil 10:07–10:37a.m. 6.79.910:06a.m. 3342 10a.m. 15.834.111:28–11:59a.m. 11.316.611:20a.m. 2750 11:55a.m. 12.134.112:20–12:33p.m. 12.714.312:33p.m. 2646 1:45p.m. 11.6 — — — — 2:17p.m. 2646 — — —
The Fire The combination of high, shifting winds Time of Start. The Honey Fire and low fuel-moisture content prevailing atthe started at9:50a.m. on January 25, time ofthe fire created critical burning conditions. 1938, inthe manner described. The fire-behavior crew, having been traveling south along U.S. 167 about 1 mile (1.6km) behind the train, arrived atthe fire at9:53a.m. Atthe moment, the fire had advanced more than 100 feet (30m). Rate of Spread. Three members ofthe crew started mapping the fire at9:55a.m., while the fourth member collected fuel and soil samples and set up instruments to obtain weather data. The main head ofthe fire and the north flank were mapped at that time andat each 5-minute interval thereafter. After the first 5 minutes, during which ithad moved almost 6 chains (396 feet [121m]) forward from the point of origin, the head ofthe fire advanced ata rate rang­ ing from 25to 35 chains (1,650to 2,310 feet [503–705m]) for each 5­ minute period. This head, labeled Aon the accompanying map (fig. 1) showing the progress of those parts ofthe fire that could be reached for mapping with the limited fire- behavior crew available, stopped ofits own accord when it reached an abandoned Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) camp site on which a heavy cover of carpet grass was present. Because of distinct shifts in wind direction from northwest to south­ west, however, anew head B devel­ oped along the north flank (fig. 1). A total of eight heads were mapped during the course of this fire; allof the heads labeled from B through H developed either by wind shifts along the north flank ofthe main head Aand its subsequent heads or from spotting across roads or burned firebreaks. There were great differences inthe rates of spread ofthe flames atdif­ ferent points onthe fire. Inthe main, however, the fire spread for­ ward atthe rate of5 to6 chains (330to 396 feet [101–121m]) per minute. The greatest rate of spread measured ina forward direction was8 chains (528 feet [101m]) in1 minute. Inthe easternmost part ofthe area, where the fire was finally brought under control and Figure 1—Mapof the Honey Fire, showing rate of spread and fire behavior.
where there were dense stands of blackjack oakin which the carry­ ing fuel was considerably less than inthe open longleaf pine areas, the forward rate of spread dropped toas lowas 1 chain (66 feet [20m]) per minute. The perimeter and area increases that accompany the forward rates of spread on fast-moving fires are also very high; the figures for the main head Aare given in table 3. Fire Behavior. Besides collecting data onthe rate of spread ofthe fire, the mapping crew recorded observations of various items of fire behavior that influence fire- suppression action. Among these were flame height, width ofthe burning line, incidence and dis­ tance of spotting, and difficulties experienced bythe fire fighters. The flames atthe head frequently reached outin long tongues extending 100 feet (30m) or more in advance ofthe actual burning ofthe fuel; onthe flanks, a slight shift in wind direction would increase the flame height from an average of3 to4 feet (1–1.2m) to20 to25 feet (6–8m), with the width ofthe burning line 15 feet (5m) or more. There were numerous cases of spotting fora considerable distance ahead ofthe fire; inone instance, when the wind velocity was13 miles per hour (21km/h), fire spotted over 200 feet (60m) in advance ofthe head. An unusual case of spotting occurred when a dead snag, located 95 feet (30m) from the nearest edge of fire, ignit­ edat a height of12 feet (4m) above the ground. Hardwood leaves, especially those from black­ jack oaks, were responsible for all spot fires noted. The spread ofthe fire was stopped and the fire corralled at2:43p.m.; the fire was controlled and mop-up completed at6:45p.m. The final total area burned in this fire was1,092 acres (442ha), of which 493 acres (200ha) were on national-forest land and the remainder, or599 acres (242ha), on privately owned land within the national-forest boundary. Ofthe national-forest land burned, 396 acres (160ha) were inthe slash- pine plantations mentioned earlier. Available Suppression Crews and Equipment. Onthe morning of January 25, nine crews of fire fighters were available tothe fire dispatcher for fire duty. The crews were made upof CCC and Work Projects Administration men who worked either atthe Stuart Nursery oron planting and road maintenance jobs within easy driv­ ing distance ofthe central tower. The crew organization is shown in table 4. The standard fire tools, with which all except crew No. 1 were equipped, consisted of flaps (swat­ ters), hand-operated back-pack pumps, fire rakes, water buckets, railroad “fusee” torches, axes, etc., allof which were kept ina wooden boxon the trucks transporting the men. The pumper truck was equipped with dual wheels, a350­ gallon (1,325-L), water tank, anda pressure pump unit driven from the fan-belt ofthe engine. Discovery. The fire was discovered bythe lookout onthe Catahoula Table 3—Rate of spread on main head (A) of Honey Fire. Time elapsed after Forward progress (chains [ft]) Perimeter (chains [ft]) Area (acres) start Total Increase Total Increase Total Increase 5min 10min 15min 20min 25min 30min 35min 5.7 (376) 32.8 (2,165) 57.4 (3,788) 93.4 (6,164) 126.0 (8,316) 148.2 (9,781) 175.9 (11,609) 5.7 (376) 27.1 (1,789) 24.6 (1,624) 36.0 (2,376) 32.6 (2,152) 22.2 (1,465) 27.7 (1,828) 13.6 (898) 70.4 (4,646) 121.3 (8,006) 195.9 (12,929) 263.4 (17,384) 311.9 (20,585) 368.6 (24,328) 13.6 (898) 56.8 (3,749) 50.9 (3,359) 74.6 (4,924) 67.5 (4,455) 48.5 (3,201) 56.7 (3,742) 0.910.227.160.5109.2167.4250.80.99.316.933.448.758.283.4
Crew No. Firefighters Supervisory personnel Total Equipment 11 12 Pumper truck, 350-gallon capacity. 212 113 Standard fire tools. 35 16 Do. 424 125 Do. 520 222 Do. 621 122 Do. 717 219 Do. 818 119 Do. 911 112 Do. Misc. superv. pers. — 88 — Total 12919 148 — Tower, located 2 miles (3.2km) tothe east, at9:52a.m. (2 minutes after the start) and reported imme­ diately tothe fire dispatcher. A cross-shot was obtained from the Colfax Tower lookout, 4 miles (6.4km) tothe west at9:53a.m. The fire dispatcher, therefore, hada reasonably definite location ofthe fire within 3 minutes ofits start. At that moment, however, itwas impossible to determine with absolute certainty on which side ofthe railroad track the fire was burning. There was still a possibili­ ty that the fire was burning inthe 150 feet (50m) of grassland between U.S. 167 and the west side ofthe railroad track or even west ofthe highway. Crew Dispatch and Initial Attack. The map showing the initial and subsequent crew locations (fig. 2) indicates the points at which the fire was attacked before control was attained. Crew 1, consisting ofthe pumper truck with a driver and hoseman, was the first crew dispatched tothe fire. It left Catahoula Tower, where itwas standing byfor emergency use, at9:53a.m. and went directly tothe origin ofthe fire near U.S. 167. While enroute, the driver determined definitely that the fire wason the east side ofthe railroad track. The train momentarily delayed himby blocking the road crossing leading into the fire. He then made an attempt to reach the fire, but the pitcher-plant (Sarracenia spp.) land which itwas then burning wasso wet and boggy that this was impossible. He returned, therefore, to Catahoula Tower and received instructions towet down the fuel andbe prepared to extinguish spots along the east side of Tower Road, starting near the tower, while crews 3and 4, who had meanwhile reported at Catahoula Tower for fire duty, burned a backfire along the west side of Tower Road. Meanwhile, crew 2, the leader of which was fire boss, left Catahoula Tower for the fire at9:55a.m., going tothe point of origin. Thus crew was momentarily delayed bythe train atthe road crossing. Itis estimated that the fire hada perimeter of40 chains (2,640 feet [805m]) upon their arrival. They started to extinguish fire along the north flank near the head for the purpose of checking the fire by cutting it into a cultivated field located about three-quarters mile (1.2km) southeast ofthe origin. These tactics failed when the head passed tothe north ofthe field; the forward progress ofthe south flank, however, was checked when it reached the field. The crew leader then split his crew; he left 7men to suppress the fire, starting from the tail and working toward the head, and led the remaining 5men (crew 2B) on foot across country tothe west firebreak. The main head ofthe fire, mean­ while, had reached Tower Road, where itwas stopped bythe aban­ doned CCC camp and the fireline burned by crews 3and 4and the pumper truck; crews 3and 4 then went tothe west firebreak to burn more backfire similar to that which they had just completed on Tower
Figure 2—Map showing points at which the Honey Fire was attacked. Road. There the fire boss assem­ bled crews 3and 4and his own 5men (a total of37 men) onthe west firebreak and attacked the north flank near the head and worked toward the tail. Progress by this large crew in extinguishing the fire along the north flank was encouraging; a boundary length of33 chains (2,178 feet [634m]) was put out and being held successful­ ly. Upto this time, the wind had blown steadily outof the north­ west, with little orno evidence of shifting markedly in direction. At10:44a.m., the wind distinctly veered from northwest to south­ west, resulting ina big sweep inthe flank and the formation ofa new head. The suppressed crew was forced to yield ground. The new head (B), which wiped out all the line that had been held upto that time, reached the west fire­ break in9 minutes (at10:53a.m.) and was held at that point when the head hit the backfire. Later Attack and Tactics. Following the initial attack described, during which two differ­ ent heads on fast-moving fires were stopped by indirect attack or back­ firing buton which the fire onthe north flanks was not controllable, the crews resorted to further back­ firing along the west firebreak, Tower Road, State Highway 19, and the east firebreak, andto patrolling the east side of these roads topre­ vent the formation ofnew heads by spotting when an oncoming head reached a backfire. Efforts to extinguish the north flanks were made only when itwas reasonably certain that the head could be held atthe backfire. Inall the heads mapped, the backfire effectively stopped the progress ofthe head ofthe fire. Heads Gand H resulted from spotting across Tower Road before adequate back­ fires were completed. In extinguishing the fire along the north flanks, the crews, with one exception, attacked the fire from a point near the head and worked toward the tail. The only fire fight­ ingon the north flank from the tail toward the head was done bythe original crew (2A) of7 men, who were left near the tail when crew 2was split. Asa consequence, acon­ siderable distance along the north flank (for the most part, 1 mile [1.6km] or more) between the tail and the west firebreak was left to burn freely, and with each shift in wind direction tothe southwest new heads would develop. Examples of mapped heads that resulted from this situation areC, D, andF; sev­ eral unmapped heads developed previously inthe area west ofthe west firebreak, causing heads C, D, andF by spotting across this fire­ break.
Fire along the south flank wasof minor concern during the run ofthe fire, small roving patrols were stationed at strategic points along State Highway 19to backfire wide strips andto watch for spotting across the road when heads reached the road. The large culti­ vated field located three-quarters ofa mile (1.2km) southeast ofthe origin did much to lessen the fire danger along the south flank. The shift in wind direction from north­ west to southwest also reduced the fire danger along the south flank, since it resulted ina relatively slow-moving flank burning into the wind with only occasional minor sweeps when the wind changed back tothe northwest. Final Attack. Inthe final attack onthe fire, during which itwas brought under control, wider fire­ breaks were burned along Tower Road and the east firebreak. The suppression crews also attacked the north flank ofthe fires from the tail toward the head by reinforcing the small crew left originally atthe tail to work east. The pumper truck did very effective work along the north flank where the ground was solid enough so that it would not bog down. Throughout the final attack, effective and rapid suppression onthe north flank was accomplished by working from the tail toward the head and mopping upthe edges ofthe fire simultane­ ously. Output of Held Line. During the course ofthe fire, measurements were taken ofthe line extinguished by various crews. The amount of line held per man-hour varied greatly at different points onthe fire, depending upon the behavior ofthe fire and the conditions under which itwas being fought. In table 5a record is given ofthe output of held line per man-hour for different sized crews with remarks concerning the conditions under which they worked. Record of Stringing Backfire. Data onthe rate at which backfires or burned firebreaks were strung by different methods were obtained at several points onthe fire. These data donot include the manpower required to keep the backfire under control by patrolling and mopping up spot fires. The data given in table 6are only for stringing fire ina straight line without regard tothe width ofthe backfire burned. Ratio of Line Actually Extinguished to Total Needed for Control. As pointed out above inthe discussions ofthe initial attack and the output of held line, consid­ erable line was lost because ofthe behavior ofthe fire at certain points. No accurate record ofthe total line extinguished but later lost is available. Ithas been conser­ vatively estimated by Kisatchie National Forest personnel, howev­ er, that ofthe 864 chains (57,024 feet [17,831m]) of line actually built to corral the fire, 240 chains (15,840 feet [4,828m], or27.9per­ cent) were lost during the suppres­ sion action and did not contribute toward the control ofthe fire. The difference, or624 chains (41,184 feet [12,553m]), therefore, would have been sufficient to attain con­ trol ofthe fire. The ratio of line actually extin­ guished, but later lost, tothe total needed for control is240 chains (15,840 feet [4,828m]) to624 chains (41,184 feet [16,667m]); Table 5—Rate of held line per man-hour at various points on Honey Fire. Location of suppression action Number menin crew Held line per man-hour (chains [ft]) Remarks North flank—head A19 4.7 (309) No shift in wind. North flank—head A6 –11.6 (–765) Line lost—shifting wind. North flank—head D14 5.8 (385) Some crew members idle or resting. North flank—head G14 9.1 (601) In heavy cover ofoak leaves. North flank—head H18 9.15 (604) In heavy oak brush—medium fuel. North flank—heads F, G Pumper truck 126.6 (8,356) Average difficulties with trees and soft ground. North flank—head A10 5.03 (332) Average conditions—men placed too much reliance on water.
thus, 38.5 percent more line was built than actually needed. The final perimeter ofthe fire when controlled was 934 chains (61,644 feet [18,789m]). The discrepancy between the final perimeter and the length of line actually needed for control, or310 chains (20,460 feet [6,236m]), is accounted forby the fact that practically none ofthe south flank required suppression, because the fire went outof its own accord when it reached the cultivated field, the abandoned CCC camp, Highway 19, and the backfire along Tower Road. Difficulties Encountered by Fire Fighters. The suppression crews were under tremendous handicaps and personal discomfort, caused bythe heavy, choking smoke and the dense cloud of ashes, soot, and sparks, when patrolling an onrush­ ing head asit hita backfire. At such times, itwas impossible for them to face toward the head; not only was the visibility extremely bad, but also the dense ashes and sparks, carried swiftly bythe draft ofthe fire, compelled the fire fight­ ersto turn their backs tothe fire and cover their smarting eyes with their hands. The fire fighters expe­ rienced considerable difficulty in walking against andin using their equipment inthe strong wind cur­ rents created near the head ofthe fire. Thus, the efficiency ofthe fire fighters stationed at these points to extinguish break-overs and spot fires was greatly reduced. Further, the roar ofthe fire and wind at these points made it impossible for the crews to hear verbal orders of their foremen. The heat onthe north flanks when the wind shifted was oppressive, and the danger ofa crew getting trapped bythe high, oncoming flames was great. The hose manon the pumper truck was particularly handicapped bythe heat because hehad toget very close tothe fire to place the water effectively. Because ofthe relatively flat ter­ rain and the dense smoke, the fire boss was unable toget the clear and complete picture ofthe progress ofthe fire that he needed for the most effective useof his men in controlling the fire. Critique Recognition of Danger. In evalu­ ating the suppression action taken on this fire, it must be realized that no satisfactory methods and tech­ nique were then available tothe fire dispatcher to rate the fire dan­ ger existing atthe time ofthe fire. His experience in judging fire dan­ ger during several preceding fire seasons, however, made it clear tohim that the weather conditions then prevailing would cause a fast rate of spread and that speedy and adequate dispatch of suppression crews was essential. Consequently, hehad prepared and organized all crews for speedy dispatch. Even after dispatching all available fire­ fighters, hewas quick to recognize the extreme conditions andto inform the supervisor’s office that the fire was out of control by reporting, “I cannot hold it.” A fire-danger meter, recently devel­ oped bythe Southern Forest Experiment Station (Bickford and Bruce 1939), should prove exceed­ ingly useful toa fire dispatcher in recognizing fire danger, particular­ ly under conditions similar to Table 6—Rate of stringing fire for backfires on Honey Fire. Backfire location Length burned per man-hour (chains [ft]) Medium used Remarks West firebreak—near heads C, D, F52.7 (3,480) Gasoline torch Inexperienced men. Tower Road—head D26.9 (1,776) Bunches of grass Backfire only 20ft wide, not enough to keep head C from crossing Tower Road. Tower Road—head F51.8 (3,420) Rakes — Highway 19—head E26.2 (1,726) Bunches of grass Inoak brush and leaves. East firebreak—head G20.9 (1,378) Bunches of grass In heavy blackjack oak. Tower Road—head D45.1 (2,978) Rakes —
those prevailing atthe time ofthe The fire fighters experienced considerable difficulty Honey Fire. The present fire-dan­ in walking against andin using their equipment ger meter, for these conditions, inthe strong wind currents created would have shown the danger as near the head ofthe fire. class 5, or extreme. With a prompt recognition ofthe fire danger and with adequate plans for the fire action tobe taken inthe event ofa fire, itis expected that fires occur­ ring during times of great danger canbe checked early and con­ trolled while still of small size. Fire-Discovery Time. Fire-discov­ ery time was excellent and the tow­ ermen areto be commended for their alertness. With good visibility and with a clear view ofthe origin ofthe fire available from Catahoula Tower, conditions were very favor­ able for quick discovery. Further­ more, when the train made an unusual stop, itwas viewed with suspicion bythe Catahoula look­ out. A cross shot was quickly obtained from Colfax Tower, located 4 miles (6.4km) west ofthe origin. Be­ cause ofthe obtuse angle of this cross shot, which the fire dispatch­ er received within 3 minutes ofthe start ofthe fire, itwas impossible toget a precise location. Moreover, hewas under specific orders from the ranger and forest supervisor to dispatch the stand-by crew imme­ diately upon obtaining a cross shot. Under ordinary conditions the location ofthe fire, as indicated bythe reported conditions, would be highly satisfactory fora prompt attack. In this particular case, how­ ever, a precise location was essen­ tial, since the subsequent fire action depended upon this point. Had the fire started onthe highway west ofthe railroad track, the logi­ cal action would have been for the fire boss to lead the first crews tothe tail ofthe fire; but since this fire started onthe east side ofthe track the preferred action, had the real danger been fully recognized, would have been to place the initial crews along the west firebreak to string backfire and send subse­ quent crews to extinguish the fire along the north flank. Itcan be argued that, under the circumstances, the fire dispatcher should have momentarily delayed initial dispatch of crews until hehad received verification from the Catahoula towerman on this seem­ ingly trivial point. However, to have made such verification at that time would have been contrary tothe forest supervisor’s instructions; under other circumstances, even the slightest delay in dispatch would have been costly insofar as size of fire was concerned. Preparedness. Adequate prepara­ tions and crew organization had been made for fighting fires onbad fire days. A total of148 men, divid­ ed into 9 properly supervised, trained, and equipped crews, were ready to respond promptly toa fire call from the dispatcher. These crews were distributed at strategic points onthe ranger district and had telephone connections with the fire dispatcher’s office. All feasi­ ble measures of preparedness had been taken. Dispatch of Crews. The dispatch tothe fire ofall the crews available onthe ranger district was effected promptly and with a minimum of confusion. Their assignments to specific points onthe fire were given clearly and definitely bythe fire dispatcher. The chain ofcom­ munications tothe individual crews previous to their initial dis­ patch tothe fire was, for the most part, very satisfactory. Some delay was experienced in reaching the crews that were working inthe Stuart Nursery quickly, because the telephone inthe nursery office was unmanned for several minutes; when word finally reached the nursery, the three crews were promptly dispatched tothe fire. Supervision. All the crews were supervised bymen who had had considerable experience fighting grass fires inthe cut-over longleaf pine type. Fires ofthe extreme intensity and rate of spread ofthe Honey Fire, however, are the exception rather than the rule. Consequently, itwas natural to expect that some mistakes in judg­ ment and action onthe part ofthe supervisory personnel would be made. The writer points out what he considers as mistakes only to guide the actions of supervisory personnel inthe future under simi­ lar circumstances. Every member ofthe supervisory personnel, including the fire boss, used a flap, a back-pack pump, or some other fire-fighting tool. Itis commendable that they were so earnest and eager toget the fire extinguished that they helped inthe physical work, butit is much more important and necessary for those in charge of fire crews to expend their energies and use their superior training in analyzing ever- changing situations ona fire, inThe crew leaders should use their heads and eyes line. Large crews working asa unit are generally inefficient either instead of their hands. Had this been done, because they stumble over one they would have quickly realized the futility another or because the work isof the tactics chosen. unbalanced, the first men bearing directing their mento work effi­ ciently, in discovering and remedy­ ing weaknesses in their work, in anticipating and planning actions, andin urging the men toward their best efforts. The crew leaders should use their heads and eyes instead of their hands. Had this been done, they would have quick­ ly realized the futility of suppress­ ing the north flanks from the head toward the tail ofthe fire. Actually, the physical efforts ofthe supervi­ sory personnel in suppressing the fire were of minor consequence, considering the fire asa whole. The fire boss should make ithis jobto keep up with every change inthe situation, know the location ofall his crews, and continually plan the action to bring the fire under control atthe earliest moment. His decisions should be direct, definite, and well-planned. Onthe Honey Fire, the fire boss, instead of placing himself atall times ata central point to gather information regarding the situa­ tion andto direct and dispatch crews, was off onthe fire line with suppression crews for considerable periods of time. Asa result, the desired movement of some crews to critical areas was delayed. Anyone onthe Catahoula Tower could have obtained an excellent grasp of much ofthe situation. When the fire passed close tothe tower the smoke was heavy and visibility was bad; later, however, the view from the tower would have given the fire boss a compre­ hensive picture ofthe fire and helped him tremendously in plan­ ning crew locations and actions. In similar situations, the fire boss should always size upthe fire either from a highpoint such asa ridge or tree top, orby cruising the area bycar, sending scouts out for information, orby referring toaer­ ial photographs. Itis strongly rec­ ommended that ona large fire the fire boss have athis disposal twoor three mento reconnoiter andto serve as messengers to carry his orders tothe leaders ofthe individ­ ual suppression crews. Morale of Fire Fighters. The morale and determination ofall men were excellent, andin many cases remarkable. Virtually allof them used their flaps and back­ pack pumps effectively, showing that the training they had received was very much worth while. During the hot flank attacks, how­ ever, the flapmen relied heavily upon the pumpmen spraying water to knock down the flames. The men should be trained to rely less upon water in fighting the flanks by having the crew leaders tem­ porarily stop suppression and rest the crews when the wind shifts ona flank, resulting ina very hot fire to fight. More line onthe flanks will be extinguished and held by resting a crew while the fire is burning intensely and then effi­ ciently directing them when the heat and flames have diminished. Crew leaders should strive to keep their crews working in units of five orsix men. A crew of this size is very flexible and mobile and, when trained for perfect coordination and teamwork, itcan hold a long the brunt ofthe attack and the stragglers expending their energies chiefly by running to keep up with them and doing relatively little productive work. The morale ofa crew weakens when the work load isnot evenly divided among all its members. Equipment. Onthe whole, the fire-fighting equipment wasin excellent condition. In only one instance was failure of equipment noted, namely, the railroad fusees intended for stringing backfire, which would not ignite, undoubt­ edly because they had become damp from atmospheric moisture. The crew attempting to extend the backfire along the west firebreak one-half mile (0.8km) north of Highway 19was delayed while try­ ingto make the fusees ignite. The result was that heads C, D, and later F crossed the graded fire­ break, and eventually ledto heads Gand H. The need for having all equipment in perfect order was strongly exemplified by this one small but important failure. The supply of tools for all fire fighters was automatic in that each crew hadan adequate amount of standard fire-fighting equipment inthe truck on which they traveled tothe fire. No delays were noted on this account. The urgent need for accessory equipment on fires of this type was brought outby the handicaps and difficulties encountered bythe fire fighters. Emphatically, the crews assigned to backfiring and patrolling backfires should besup­ plied with smokeproof goggles so
that they can work efficiently in More line onthe flanks will be extinguished and the smoke and flying ashes. The held by resting a crew while the fire is burning value of such goggles was indicated intensely and then efficiently directing them when bythe fact that one fire fighter, the heat and flames have diminished. normally working asa welder inthe shop, wore his dark welding glasses while patrolling, and later commented that he experienced no great discomfort from ashes, soot, or sparks when the head reached the backfire. Respirators should also be investigated to determine whether ornot the patrol crews could perform more effectively with such equipment. Since the hose manon a pumper truck is subject to intense heat and smoke over a prolonged period, he also should be provided with special equipment to enable himto dohis job better. Asbestos hoods and suits have already been developed for such use and might upon trial prove ideal for this specific pur­ pose. Technique of Attack. The logical point of initial attack onthe Honey Fire, as already discussed, depend­ edon a very accurate location ofits origin. As soon asthe fire boss saw that the fire was definitely onthe east side ofthe railroad track with a large area of dense grass before itfor its run, he should have directed his crew (No. 2) together with crew 3to start backfiring immediately and liberally along the west side ofthe west firebreak. The pumper truck should also have been avail­ able at this point to support the fire fighters. Crews 4and 5, com­ prising 47men, should then have been dispatched tothe tail to extin­ guish the north flank from the tail toward the head. Crew 6of 22men and, if needed crew 7of 19men, should then have been dispatched to patrol highway 19and the south flank. The2 remaining crews, com­ prising 31men, if called atall bythe fire dispatcher and fire boss, should have been held atthe Cataholua Tower as stand-by crews. These positions are shown onthe suggested locations and tactics map (fig. 3). Initial backfiring should have been started promptly along the west firebreak instead of along Tower Road. The woods road, located one- half mile (0.8km) tothe west, could not have been used for the Figure 3—Map showing suggested crew locations and tactics.
Itis very important that backfires be sufficiently long to stop the onrushing head even ifa shifting wind has changed its direction, and sufficiently wide to prevent spotting across the backfire. initial backfiring because (1) insuf­ ficient time would have been avail­ able to string an adequate backfire along the woods road before the main head reached it, and (2) there could be legal complications and violation of policy hada backfire been strung on privately owned land not bordering Government- owned land, even though national- forest land was seriously threat­ ened. Prompt backfiring along the west firebreak would have over­ come both of these difficulties. At least 20 minutes would have been available tothe crews for stringing backfire along the west firebreak, since the main head did not reach this point until 10:20a.m. This would have been ample time for the three crews available to have strung at least one-half mile (0.8km) of backfire 100or more feet (30+ m) wide. Itwas impossible to burn such a protec­ tion strip around the plantation earlier inthe season because the land involved was privately owned. The20-foot-wide (6-m-wide) grad­ ed firebreak surrounding the plan­ tation was scraped clean ofall veg­ etation and was an exce1lent line from which to backfire safely. Had the initial attack of stringing backfire along the west firebreak failed so that the fire spread into the plantation, the next attack should have been to string back­ field along the Tower Road, using the stand-by crews available at Catahou1a Tower. Atall places where an adequate firebreak had been burned, the onrushing head was checked and the few spots that started inthe unburned grass across the fire­ break were quickly extinguished bythe patrol crew. The checking of heads B, D, andF are good exam­ ples of control with backfiring. When the backfiring is delayed orthe patrol crew inadequate, asfor example on heads C, G, andH, break-overs occur almost invari­ ably, greatly delaying control ofthe fire. Backfiring. Backfire canbe safely strung ata fast rate even with the crudest, equipment, as shown in table 6. The greatest precautions must be taken, however, to keep the backfire always under control andto avoid the misfortune oflet­ ting itget away. Atthe same time, a backfire, tobe effective, must beof sufficient width and length to hold the main head being fought as well asany additional heads that may subsequently develop before the flanks are controlled. Onthe Honey Fire, the backfiring crews strung fire too timidly, par­ ticularly insofar asthe length ofthe backfire was concerned. Itwas most fortunate that the backfires were so successful, since they were seldom more than 50 feet (15m) wide. Furthermore, had the crews not been so reluctant to string long backfires, control ofthe fire could undoubtedly have been gained much earlier. This reluc­ tance canin part be accounted forby the fact that backfiring along the Tower Road and the east fire­ break would necessarily mean deliberately burning part ofthe plantation. The acreage consumed in backfire, however, is negligible; each mile of backfire 100 feet (30m) wide requires only 12 acres (5ha). This would have been a trivial loss for the great protection it offered. The following technique for string­ ing backfire has been effectively and safely used andis recommend­ edfor use whenever backfiring must be resorted toin order to obtain control: Organize the crew into fire stringers and patrolmen. The latter should take their posi­ tions across the line from which the backfire is being burned. Their only jobis to keep alert for possible spotting along the entire backfire line andto extinguish spots quick­ ly, as they occur. The stringers, three or four selected menin each crew, should be given special train­ ingin the methods of stringing fire, using bunches of grass, a fire rake, a torch, or other available equipment. The first man should string his line of fire parallel toand approximately 10 feet (3m) from the line from which the backfire is being made. The width will, of course, depend upon numerous factors, among which are the type and density ofthe fuel, the wind velocity, and the width and condi­ tion ofthe line (road, etc.) from which itis being made. The greatest precautions should be taken toput the initial backfire line in safely. Waiting until the first man has safely burned approxi­ mately 100 feet (30m) ofhis line of fire, the second man should start his line of fire parallel tobut 20 feet (6m) from the first line. The third stringer, in turn, should
wait until 100 feet (30m) ofthe second line has been, safely burned and then string his line parallel tobut 30or 40 feet (9–12m) from the second line. If four stringers are used with intervals between lines of10, 20, 30, and50 feet (3, 6, 9, and15 m), a backfire 110 feet (34m) wide canbe burned with great rapidity. There should bean interval ofat least 100 feet (30m) between stringers atall times. The crew foreman must be very alert when backfires are being burned so that they donot get out of control. Iftwo crews are avail­ able, the backfire should be started ata point where the main head is expected tohit and the crews string backfire in opposite direc­ tions along the line from which itis being burned. The crews should continue to string fire forat least seven hundred or even 1,000 feet (210–300m) beyond the points where the danger is critical; a crew will notbe criticized for stringing too much backfire ifit has done so safely. Stand-by Crews and Reinforcements. As previously brought out, allof the firefighters available onthe ranger district were dispatched to this fire before itwas finally brought under con­ trol. Two other fires occurred onthe Catahoula Ranger District dur­ ing the Honey Fire; they were extinguished by crews dispatched from the Honey Fire without undue loss of time or acreage, indi­ cating that the fire organization was prepared to cope with serious fire conditions. The local force was strengthened bythe fine cooperation and judg­ ment ofthe ranger onthe adjoin­ ing district, who, upon passing the scene ofthe fire while enroute tohis office after attending a court trial in Alexandria, onhis own ini­ tiative phoned ahead tohis dis­ patcher to call inall work crews for the emergency andto send twoof them to stand byat aCCC side camp located about 10 miles (16km) north of Bentley. The ranger isto be commended because he took definite action when hesaw the need. Summary A detailed analysis ofthe Honey Fire is presented in order (1) to show the rapid rate of spread and the behavior ofa fire burning under critical weather conditions inthe southern pine type ofa coastal plain, (2) to describe the suppression action taken, and (3) to offer constructive criticism and suggestions asa guide in planning suppression action for future fires burning under similar conditions. The combination of high, shifting winds and low fuel-moisture con­ tent prevailing atthe time ofthe fire created critical burning condi­ tions. The rate of spread was extremely high, the maximum for­ ward increase measured being 8 chains (528 feet [160m]) in1 minute orat a rate ofa mile in10 minutes (97km/h). In order to control such a fire itis necessary to have an adequately equipped suppression force avail­ able ata moment’s notice. The dif­ ficulties experienced by fire fight­ ersat various parts ofthe Honey Fire are stated and suggestions are made for the useof accessory equipment in overcoming such handicaps. There isa distinct need also for efficient supervision of each crew, as well as able leader­ ship, including well-planned tac­ tics, bythe fire boss. The futility of attempting tocon­ trol the flanks by suppressing a rapidly spreading fire from a point near the head toward the tail ofthe fire is brought out. Such tactics lead toa great loss in what would otherwise be held line and make it possible for new uncontrollable heads to form with each relatively slight change in wind direction. The heads of rapidly spreading fires cannot be stopped by direct attack with the equipment now available; one must resort toan indirect attack involving the use of backfir­ ing. Fighting fire with fire canbe very dangerous, however, and the greatest care must be exercised inits useif an adequate backfire isto be attained andif break-overs areto be prevented. A method of back­ firing, in which fire is simultane­ ously strung by three or four men separated by definite distance and width intervals, is outlined. Itis very important that backfires be sufficiently long to stop the onrushing head even in case its direction of burning has been changed bya shift inthe wind, and sufficiently wide to prevent spot­ ting across the backfire, which may start new heads. Acknowledgment Grateful acknowledgment is given toA.H. Antonie, R. Brooks, andC.A. Bickford for invaluable assis­ tance not only in mapping and recording data but also incon­ structive criticism and review ofthe manuscript. References Bickford, C.A.; Bruce, David. 1939. A tenta­ tive fire-danger meter for the longleaf­ slash pine type. Occ. Pap. No. 87. Asheville, NC: USDA Forest Service, Southern Forest Experiment Station. Headley, R. 1939. Lessons from larger fires in 1938. Fire Control Notes. 3(4): 40–41. ■
THE B OWER CAVE FIRE * Leon R. Thomas The Bower Cave Fire of August 13, 1947, onthe Tuolumne District ofthe Stanislaus National Forest is being reviewed to show howa fast-moving fire, which was burning in steep terrain andin heavy cover, was readily and quickly controlled, after the first attack had failed, by effective useof modern equipment, andby the local people and trained Forest Service personnel working effec­ tively asa team. Dangerous Fire Month August isa most dangerous fire month in this area. The weather is normally hot, fuel moisture islow, and rapid spread of fires can always be expected. Atthe time of this fire normal weather conditions pre­ vailed throughout the district andno important changes were fore­ cast. Itis estimated that there wasan upslope wind of8 miles per hour (13km/h) blowing atthe fire when the first crews arrived. It increased in velocity during the day but never blew hard. There isa normal downdraft at night with increase in humidity. Bower Cave, a former resort, is located near the old Coulterville– Yosemite road where the road crosses the North Fork ofthe Merced River (fig. 1). The ridge between Bower Cave and McCauley ranch and Scott Ridge tothe north ofthe river have moderate to steep slopes and are covered with scat- When this article was originally published, Leon Thomas wasa fire control officer for the USDA Forest Service, Sequoia National Forest, CA. * The article is reprinted from Fire Control Notes 10(2) [Spring 1949]: 26–31. Extended attack went according to schedule, and the night work wasso efficient that by midnight most ofthe lines had been built and burned out. tered ponderosa pine and black oak with a heavy ground cover ofman­ zanita and scrub oak. Elevation ranged from 2,350 feet (720m) at Bower Cave to3,400 feet (1,040m) atthe higher reaches ofthe fire perimeter. The sets were ona grassy, pine–oak flat with the steeper slopes and heavier cover just tothe north. For many years there has been an incendiary problem on this part ofthe ranger district. Sets are always in high hazard types; and several severe fires have been the result. This fire appeared tobe another of that type. First Report The first report was received inthe district ranger’s office at9:25a.m. August 13, 1947. The ranger, fire control assistant, and the district clerk-dispatcher were inthe office when the report was phoned inby the caretaker at Bower Cave. He reported that there were several small fires burning onthe upper side ofthe McCauley road between Bower Cave and the miners’ cabins one-half mile (0.8km) upthe road (fig. 1). The area is blind toall lookouts and not until 9:40a.m. did the lookout on Pilot Peak report smoke coming up over the ridge that blanked out the area for him. Figure 1—Mapof Bower Cave Fire, Stanislaus National Forest, CA.
The Kinsley Station crew, being the nearest organized fire suppres­ sion crew, consisting that dayof two men anda light pickup tanker, was immediately dispatched. They arrived atthe fire at9:48a.m. The fire control assistant and one fire­ man arrived at9:56a.m. The ranger station crew oftwo men and a tanker was dispatched aswas the third organized fire crew onthe district, the McDiar­ mid Station crew of four men and a tanker. The district ranger helped the clerk notify the central dispatcher anda few local people and was atthe fire by10:05a.m. with a radio- equipped pickup. The Kinsley crew found five sepa­ rate fires burning onthe upper side ofthe road within a distance of about 100 yards (90m). Two Pacific Gas & Electric Co. power line construction employees, who had seen the smoke while working ona nearby line, were already put­ ting a line around the fire nearest Bower Cave. These two men cor­ ralled this fire, the smallest ofthe five, at about one-tenth ofan acre (0.04ha) in size. The Kinsley fore­ man left his one manon the sec­ ond fire and attempted to handle the other three alone with the aid ofa light tanker. These three fires were the largest ofthe five and were rapidly burning together. They were burning inthe grass and pine needles and were working toward the steep slope above. Little effective control work had been accomplished onthe upper four fires when the fire control assistant arrived at9:56a.m. Heand the one man with him joined the Kinsley foreman in attempting tocut off the head ofthe main fire The early and efficient dispatching of personnel and equipment bythe district and the central dispatcher wasan important factor. atthe toeof the steep slope. The Bower Cave caretaker had also arrived and was assisting the fore­ man. Initial Attack Failure The fire was burning very hot and was spotting badly upthe steep slope when the ranger arrived at10:05a.m. He fell in with the other menin attempting tocut off the head and control the spots. The fires which had now burned into one were just too hot to handle and the light tanker was ineffec­ tive. By10:15a.m. itwas fully realized that the initial attack had failed. The heavier tankers from the ranger station and the McDiarmid Station did not arrive until too late tobe of value on initial attack. The ranger and the fire control assistant made plans for and imme­ diately started a flanking action to keep the fire narrow and possibly pinch itout onthe ridge above, should sufficient help arrive soon enough. There wasa very good possibility of control ontop ofthe ridge above Bower Cave since once the fire reached the top it would have to burn along the ridge or downhill fora considerable dis­ tance. The cover was also lighter along the ridge andon the north slope. The dispatcher was notified ofthe situation by radio anda request was sent into the supervisor’s office to have the fire and the area scouted from the air. Orders were sent into get all the help possible from the local sawmills, woods crews, Pacific Gas & Electric Co. construction crew, and the local ranchers. Two15-main district road construction crews anda 50­ man district blister rust crew were also ordered. A fire camp wasto beset upat Bower Cave. Itwas calcu­ lated that this number ofmen could corral and hold the fire onthe ridge that afternoon with an estimated area of about 200 acres (80ha). After 10a.m. the men began to arrive rapidly, as indi­ cated bythe number onthe fire in table 1. The forest fire control officer flew the fire at11:15a.m. ina conven­ tional aircraft and reported tothe ground by radio that the flanking action was making good progress and that ithad a very good chance for success bythe early afternoon. Spot Fire At12 noon the ranger anda local rancher scouted the ridge in front ofthe fire and kept in communica­ tion with anSX radio. At12:16p.m. the lookout on Pilot Peak reported a smoke inthe bottom ofthe Merced River about one-half mile (0.8km) tothe northeast ofthe original fire (fig. 1). Ina few minutes the ranger could see the smoke from his position onthe ridge. It appeared tobe burning on both sides ofthe canyon and spreading toward Scott Ridge and the McCauley ranch as well as back toward the original fire. The forest fire control officer again scouted the fire from the air at2 p.m. The ranger inthe meantime had gone around and scouted the new fire from the Scott Ridge side.
Time of arrival Personnel onthe fire Local labor Forest Service Cumulative total 9:30a.m. 20 29:48a.m. 12 59:56a.m. 02 710:05a.m. 02 911:00a.m. 8140 13012:00 noon 210 151 Note: The fire was first reported at9:25a.m. Through radio discussion with the fire control officer inthe plane and with the ground scouting informa­ tion, itwas determined that the fires would burn together before they could be controlled. Itwas then decided that both fires should be handled asone. The cause ofthe spot fire was not determined. Itmay have been another set. No attempt was made to send mento itas itwas spread­ ing rapidly when first discovered andan initial action crew would have been ineffective. Itwas realized now that control lines would embrace an area ofa thousand acres (400ha) or more and that a good deal ofthe line on Scott Ridge and the McCauley area wasa bulldozer show. Additional tractors were ordered. TwoD–7 caterpillars were walked tothe McCauley ranch from a nearby Forest Service road construction job. OneD–7 caterpillar was trucked in from another Forest Service road jobon the district anda TD–14, the Forest Service fire standby tractor, was trucked in from the supervisor’s headquarters. Two bulldozers were already onthe fire, aD–6 from a nearby gold dredge andan AC tractor from a nearby sawmill. These last two arrived early but were of little useon the original fire. Extended Attack All effort was now turned toward handling the two fires asone along the following plan: The hand line that had been constructed along the west side ofthe fire above Bower Cave wasto be dropped into the river tothe north and held. The front ofthe fire on Scott Ridge wasto be headed anda line dropped tothe river along each flank. The line onthe west side wasto tieto the hand line atthe river. Each ofthe lines from Scott Ridge wasa bulldozer show until they reached the steep river slope. A line wasto be built from McCaul­ ey’s over the ridge tothe north and then tothe river and tie tothe east line from Scott Ridge. The road from the McCauley ranch to Bower Cave wasto be backfired. Four ofthe bulldozers were walked to Scott Ridge where two were to work on each ofthe lines from Scott Ridge tothe river. Two trac­ tors were to operate from McCauley’s. The camp was now in full swing and all incoming men were organ­ ized into crews with sufficient Forest Service overhead for good management. The fire control officer and the for­ est supervisor came into the camp at about 4p.m. With the aid of scouting information and aerial photos the final control routes were determined. The fire was divided into four divisions and the division overhead personnel were briefed onthe construction and the backfiring plan. By6 p.m. all crews, tractors, and other equip­ ment were onthe line and pre­ pared fora night operation. The plan went according to sched­ ule and the night work wasso effi­ cient that by midnight most ofthe lines had been built and burned out. Many ofthe dangerous snags were felled by power-saw crews before the backfires were started. This wasan important factor in reducing the possibility of spot fires as well as cutting down mop- upand patrol work later. The fire was declared tobe under control by9 a.m. Mop-UpA look atthe available Forest Service manpower inthe early evening indicated that there was not enough for the mop-upjob the next day. Needs were calculated andan order was placed for one division team from another forest and 150 off-forest laborers. The
division team was flown in from the Sequoia Forest and the 150 laborers were picked upin Stockton inthe San Joaquin Valley. All were at camp in time for the next day’s shift. The Sequoia team didan excellent jobon a division unit and returned to their home forest after one shift. Mop-up proceeded rapidly during the early morning and the next day with tractors widening lines, with tankers working along the bulldoz­ er lines and the roads, and with power saws felling the remaining snags. Especially important onmop-upwas a4-by-4 blister rust spray rig. This four-wheel-drive unit with its long light hoses reached many places that were inaccessible tothe conventional tankers. Two Pacific marine portable pumpers and hose were taken into the river onthe east side ofthe fire by pack horses and were used very effectively onmop-upon the river slopes. The fire boss was equipped with a jeep anda portable radio during the mop-up period. Hewas able to cover allof the fire lines inthe jeep except the steep river slopes. The fire was declared tobe officially outon August 23. Factors for Success There were many factors working together that contributed tothe control ofthe fire prior tothe burning period ofthe second day. The most outstanding ones are list­ edin the following paragraphs. The early and efficient dispatching of personnel and equipment bythe district and the central dispatcher wasan important factor. Men and materials were ready togo. Sufficient experienced Forest Service and local men were readily The use of aerial scouting and aerial photos for plotting the fire and the control line aided greatly in early control. available. Exceptionally good coop­ eration was received from the local people—labor from the sawmills, woods crews with power-felling equipment, electric power line construction employees, and expe­ rienced local ranchers. There were 210 men onthe line during the night shift and 272 onthe line dur­ ing the next day. Men were released rapidly after the end ofthe second day’s shift. The effectiveness ofthe work dur­ ing the first night wasan outstand­ ing factor inthe early control ofthe fire. Control could not have been effected by9 a.m. the follow­ ing morning, however, even with the manpower available hadit not been for the efficient work ofthe tractor operators inthe heavy manzanita cover. Lights onthe six tractors enabled them to work all night. Wide effective lines were the result. Total perimeter ofthe fire was 598 chains (39,468 feet [12,030m]) handled as shown in table 2. Excellent radio communication during the entire fire made admin­ istration fairly easy. The radio net centered around the Pilot Peak lookout who used aTset for receiving and relaying messages. Division bosses were equipped with portable SX sets. A mobile unit and then anSX set were used bythe fire boss. A mobile set was used inthe fire camp. A telephone connection was made toa nearby line and run tothe fire camp. This took a load off the radio net. The use of aerial scouting and aeri­ al photos for plotting the fire and the control line aided greatly in early control. This combined with limited ground scouting proved very effective. The camp was well located near the fire and was rapidly putin full operation by experienced person­ nel. Lunches, lights, water, and other equipment were always ready togo before departure time sched­ uled for crews. Adequate trans­ portation was available and ably coordinated under the camp boss. This fire, burning in steep heavily covered terrain, was readily con­ trolled before the second burning period at1,223 acres (495ha) because ofthe effective useof mod­ ern fire fighting equipment, the excellent cooperation of local peo­ ple, and the efficient work of Forest Service personnel. ■ Table 2—Fireline onthe Bower Cave Fire, by type. Type of line Line constructed Line backfired Chains Meters Chains Meters Hand 1603,20050 1,000 Tractor 2004,000 200 4,000 Road 2384,760 238 4,760T HEP OSSIBLE R ELATION OFA IRT URBULENCE TOE RRATIC FIRE B EHAVIOR INTHE S OUTHEAST * George M. Byram and Ralph M. Nelson Editor’s note: Early issues of Fire Control Notes often prefaced arti­ cles with substantive remarks bythe journal’s editors. A.A. Brown, an early leader in Forest Service fire research and management, prefaced the article by Byram and Nelson with the remarks inthe sidebar. Fire control men have long sus­ pected that there are unidentified factors that contribute tothe strange behavior and spread of some fires. H.T. Gisborne, G.L. Hayes, andA.A. Brown, among oth­ ers, have believed that atmospheric instability might in part explain some ofthe western blow-up fires. Brown (1950) and Crosby (1949) speaking more generally have stat­ ed that when sufficient heat isgen­ erated bya fire inan unstable atmosphere, erratic fire behavior canbe expected. Ina report from Australia (Foley 1947), turbulence is stated tobe an important factor inthe degree of severity of bush fires and that itis of value incom­ piling forecasts of fire weather. There isnow reason to believe that turbulence may also be associated with certain severe fires inthe South. Some evidence on this point was obtained from fires that burned inan unusual manner in When this article was originally published, George Byram and Ralph Nelson worked for the USDA Forest Service, Division of Fire Research, Southeastern Forest Experiment Station, Asheville, NC. * The article is reprinted from Fire Control Notes 12(3) [Summer 1951]: 1–8. Ifthe degree of local stability inthe atmosphere proves tobe akey factor in unexpected and dangerous fire behavior, skill in control of large fires canbe greatly advanced. the Coastal Plain of South Carolina during afew days ofthe 1950 spring fire season. Southeastern States experienced an unusually severe season during that period. A prolonged drought, interrupted only by occasional rains, began in November and per­ sisted in some areas until May. This brought about abnormally low fuel moistures which, combined with high winds, resulted ina large number of fires anda large acreage burned. Apparently there were two rather definite types of severe fires. The first, driven by high winds, was characterized by high rates of spread, especially while crowning. From the standpoint ofthe safety of suppression crews and their equipment, this type of fire has not Prefatory Remarks byA.A. Brown “Blowups” and other forms of unaccountable fire behavior, that charac­ terize many ofour more disastrous fires every year, were a special topic that was given much emphasis atthe fire meeting held in Ogden, UT, in January 1950. New research on this problem was urged and all research men were urged tooto make available every bitof new infor­ mation that might be useful tothe fire strategist even though this might mean some reporting ahead of final evaluation. Iam very happy to present this report by George M. Byram and Ralph M. Nelson, two members ofthe research group, asnew information that I personally believe is highly significant though further confirma­ tion, evaluation, and means of prediction are needed and will require much further investigation. Ifthe degree of local stability inthe atmos­ phere proves tobe akey factor inthe unexpected and often dangerous behavior of many ofour large fires, andit canbe identified in advance, one more ofthe unknowns will be eliminated and skill in control of large fires canbe greatly advanced. This preliminary report should bea challenge toall experienced fire fighters and research men alike. Have we been ignoring oneof the con­ trolling factors inbig fire behavior?
been considered dangerous for experienced firefighters inthe Southeast. The second type differed from the first in that its peculiar whirling nature and unpredictable behavior made even a flank attack dangerous. Itis with the second type that this report is concerned. The Buckle Island and Farewell Fires* Following isa description oftwo whirling fires that occurred onthe Francis Marion National Forest in South Carolina. Sofar ascan be ascertained, they had characteris­ tics of behavior common to fires that burned elsewhere inthe Coastal Plain of that State during the five orsix most severe days ofthe spring season. The Buckle Island No. 144 fire burned on March 26in a densely stocked stand of loblolly pine 10to 35 feet (3–11m) in height. The day was sunny with little wind during the morning hours. The relative humidity was medium (about 35 percent) and the records ofthe Weather Bureau airport station, located approximately 40 miles (64km) from the burned area, indicat­ eda layer of highly unstable air about 400or 500 feet (120–150m) deep at10 a.m. The layer probably had become even more unstable and somewhat deeper atthe time the fire started inthe early after­ noon. However, the increased tur­ bulence may have been partly off­ setby an increase in wind velocity which took place at about noon. Apparently no large whirl devel­ oped until the fire reached a size of40 or more acres (16+ ha). One then enclosed the head and created * Acknowledgment is made to John T. Koen, formerly ranger onthe Francis Marion National Forest, to John T. Hills, Jr., and Aiken Mitchum ofthe National Forest staff for eyewitness accounts ofthe fires reported upon. Inone instance, the plow crew observed flames directly overhead while the main fire was still some distance away. trouble for the plow crews. Because the early spread ofthe fire was nearly at right angles tothe road, no short cutto the head was possible. Therefore, a flanking attack on both sides was made. Asthe plow crews progressed, the fire onthe left flank hada tendency to cross in front ofthe crew, andon the right flank, behind the crew. One large counterclockwise whirl ortwo such whirls, oneon each flank, could account for this strange behavior. Itwas later found that there wasat least one small whirl onthe right flank, although from the plane observer Mitchum saw only one large whirl. The Buckle Island fire differed somewhat from other whirling fires in that it apparently main­ tained a fairly constant direction of spread. The wind velocity was also greater and steadier than on other fires. Even so, the spread was errat­ ic. At times the fire would quiet down and then suddenly burn with fierce intensity. These bursts may have been caused bythe almost simultaneous ignition of several acres bythe whirl. Inone instance, the plow crew observed flames directly overhead while the main fire was still some distance away. The most severe fire onthe Francis Marion National Forest during the spring season from the standpoint of erratic behavior and its whirling nature was Farewell No. 172. It burned on April 11, with a light but variable southwest wind ina stand of loblolly reproduction 10to 35 feet (3–11m) in height which contained a scattering of mature trees. Weather Bureau records indicated a high degree of atmos­ pheric instability also on that day. There were three large whirls in this fire andat least two small ones. The paths ofthe larger whirls were approximately parallel and were separated by less severely burned strips 75to 100 feet (23–30m) in width. Needles on tree crowns inthe strips were not con­ sumed, andin a number of places the tops of crowns of trees 25 feet (8m) high remained alive. How­ ever, inthe paths ofthe whirls the crown foliage was generally com­ pletely consumed, on some trees toa height of80 feet (24m). Needles are not completely consumed unless they are well within the flames, soit is estimated that the flames may have ranged from 50to 150 feet (15–45m) in height. After becoming established, the whirls moved rapidly ahead ofthe main fire with sufficient updraft to carry burning embers aloft. These embers are reported to have started fires a considerable distance ahead ofthe main fire. Airplane observer Mitchum believes that twoof the three whirls burned atthe same time. He also observed that flames came outof the center ofthe tops ofthe cone-shaped whirls. The flames did not spring directly upward but had the same rotary motion, spiralling upward, asthe smoke inthe outer parts ofthe whirls. Some Characteristics of Erratic Fires Evidence from the Buckle Island and Farewell fires, and from others
Fires with erratic behavior • In flat country itis doubtful that large whirls could develop ifthe are most likely to occur on sunny days air were absolutely calm, regard- when there is strong surface heating. less of turbulence. Some wind that burned in South Carolina dur­ ing the spring season of 1950, indi­ cates that erratic fires inthe Southeast may have some common characteristics. Also, there appear tobe certain conditions of weather, fuel, and type—not fully identi­ fied—which are conducive to such fires. Although some ofthe follow­ ing conclusions regarding fire behavior and possible causes are speculative, they appear reasonable in view of what is known of certain physical laws. Confirmation ordis­ proval will require further observa­ tion and analysis. • Fires with erratic behavior are most likely to occur on sunny days when there is strong surface heating. There maybe little orno wind during the early part ofthe day, and even while the fire is burning, usually inthe after­ noon, the general wind is light or moderate. The most favorable wind for this type maybe some­ where between 8and 16 miles per hour (13–26km/h) as meas­ ured 20 feet (6m) above tree tops. • Erratic fires have a tendency to develop oneor more violent whirls after reaching a certain critical size. The size is probably not the same for all fires and may be somewhere between 20and 75 acres (8–30ha). This, however, is merely conjecture. • From the air, the diameter of larger whirls appeared to remain approximately constant andto cover an area of about 10 acres (4ha). An increase in size after they had formed was not observed. Possibly they appear suddenly and may be nearly full- size when born. After becoming established, the whirls apparently can move rapidly away from the main fire and take the direction ofthe light wind prevailing atthe time. They can consume strips of reproduction 500to 800 feet (150–240m) wide. The velocity with which these whirls travel isone of their most dan­ gerous characteristics because their speed maybe equal to, or nearly equal to, the velocity of prevailing winds. • Field men state that most ofthe worst fires occur on days with a southwest wind. This indicates a characteristic pressure system which may also account for some ofthe turbulence. Observers in airplanes have noticed that the air was always bumpy on days when whirling fires occurred. Also, when the flying became smooth inthe late afternoon whirls did not occur. • It cannot be assumed that whirls will always rotate counterclock­ wise like large-scale vortex storms such as hurricanes inthe northern hemisphere. The coun­ terclockwise rotation ofthe hur­ ricane is caused bythe rotation ofthe earth. This should have but little effect on small-scale whirls like dust devils or whirling fires. For this reason the chances are probably about equal that the whirls will bein either direction. • The depth ofthe turbulent layer maybe a dominating factor in determining the maximum size ofthe whirls, although other variables such as quantity of fuel should also have some effect. movement would be necessary to move them over fresh fuel. A high wind, onthe other hand, would reduce turbulence and might also tend to break upthe whirls. This does not mean that fires burning ina high wind will be less intense than fires burning ina light wind. A large majority of severe fires probably burn on days of high wind velocity, and rate of spread will increase with increasing wind velocity. • The effects of turbulence in areas of rough or rolling topography would be considerably more complex than in flat country. Turbulence near the ground sur­ face would probably never beas great asin flat country but this would possibly be more than off­ setby complex topographic effects. For example, large whirls could travel up slope rapidly even inan absolute calm. • An important factor inthe occur­ rence ofthe whirling type of fire maybe the fairly recent change in stand type in much ofthe Southeast. During the past 15 years extensive stands of dense pine reproduction have become established on areas formerly kept clear of pine by repeated fires. This maybe one reason why there have not been more of these fires in former years. Onthe other hand, they may have occurred more often than issup­ posed. Itis difficult for ground crews to recognize large whirls because of smoke anda limited field of view. They canbe seen best from the air. • Perhaps too much emphasis should notbe placed on just the whirling characteristics of fires burning in turbulent air.
Turbulence could have apro­ nounced effect onthe draft ofa fire long before it reaches the whirling stage. Itwas noticed that on days when there was high turbulence, even small fires burned with strong drafts. The opposite of this has long been familiar to fire fighters. Fires usually undergo a pronounced change in behavior in late after­ noon and evening when the atmosphere becomes more sta­ ble. This change has often been attributed tothe increase in rela­ tive humidity which accompanies the drop in temperature ofthe lower air layers. Itis possible that an increase inair stability may have as great, or greater influence on behavior than a combination of increased fuel moisture and decreased fuel tem­ perature. The Influence of Atmospheric Instability on Fires Unusual fire behavior, not previ­ ously experienced, was reported for the Francis Marion National Forest on March 26, April 11, 17, and24, by suppression crews. This behav­ ior, characterized byone or more whirlwinds andby sudden fierce upward bursts of flames, could notbe accounted forby any exception­ al conditions of fuel or wind. This led the writers to suspect that some unusual atmospheric condi­ tions existed atthe time ofthe fires. Accordingly, 10a.m. lapse- rate records for the 4 days men­ tioned were obtained from the Weather Bureau station atthe Charleston airport. These are graphed in figure 1. The straight dashed lines inthe graph represent the dry adiabatic lapse rates, that is, a decrease inair temperature of0.53 °Fper hun- Figure 1—Tena.m. lapse rates for March 26, April 11, 17, and24, 1950. The straight dashed lines represent the dry adiabatic lapse rates, i.e., a decrease of0.53 °Fper hun­ dred feet (0.96 °C/100m) in height. dred feet (0.96 °C/100m) in height. At this rate of decrease the atmosphere is neutrally stable. The greater the drop in temperature with height, the greater the air instability. Conversely, the less the drop in temperature with height, the less the instability. For exam­ ple, on calm, clear nights, the air temperature often does not decrease with height but even increases. The atmosphere is then highly stable and the upward movement of smoke and heated gas may stop completely after reaching a certain height. From the graph it will be seen that the unbroken lines, representing lapse rates for the 4 days, inclined sharply tothe left ofthe dashed lines fora distance equivalent toa height of300 to500 feet (90–150m). This means that layers of high­ ly unstable air existed at these depths. These conditions ofair tur­ bulence, coinciding with certain fuel and stand conditions, and size of fire or rate of energy output, are believed to explain the strange fire behavior onthe days mentioned. There is usually some turbulence on clear sunny days, but the aver­ age value ofthe turbulence factor* isnot known for the Coastal Plain in early spring. Its value maybe somewhere between 20and 50. In contrast, the turbulence factors for March 26, April 11, 17, and24, were respectively 110, 160, 390, and 135. Itis possible that there were other days during the spring season that had equally high tur­ bulence factors, but whirls or erratic fire behavior were not observed. If highly turbulent days did occur, itmay be that fires were controlled while small or before they reached the breaking point, or that they did not burn under the fuel and stand conditions most favorable to turbulence. Further analysis should clarify this point. * A turbulence factor T will be defined bythe equation LeT = 100 { – 1 } La where Leis the existing lapse rate andLa isthe dry adiabatic lapse rate. When Le = La, the air is neutrally stable andT = 0. Whenever Tis greater than 0 there is always some turbulence.
An important factor inthe occurrence ofthe whirling type of fire maybe the fairly recent change in stand type in much ofthe Southeast. Ashas been pointed out previously, very severe fires can occur on days when the atmosphere is relatively stable. On March 27the turbulence factor was only 16, but this wasa severe fire day. Asa result of high wind velocity—30to 40 miles per hour (48–64km/h) with gusts reaching almost 60 miles per hour (97km/h) atthe Charleston air- port—there were intense, fast- spreading fires which did great damage. There was nothing erratic or baffling in their behavior, how­ ever, that could notbe explained in terms of wind and fuel conditions. When a fire burns ina stable atmosphere, the hot gases must not only expend energy as they lift their masses through the stable air, but they also expend part of their energy in dragging a part ofthe surrounding air upwards. The sta­ ble air acts like a ceiling so that ona calm clear evening the smoke ris­ ing above a fire will reach a certain height and then level off. The con­ ditions are entirely different when a fire burns inan unstable atmos­ phere. The gases donot expend energy as they rise butin their ascent they may even acquire ener­ gy from the atmosphere. Their path upward creates a chimney into which the surrounding unsta­ ble air is drawn. The potential energy ofthe unstable airis then converted into kinetic energy asit enters the chimney created bythe fire. When the total rate of energy release (rate of energy output of fire plus rate of energy change inthe unstable atmosphere) is great enough, then whirls should devel­ op. Atmospheric Instability and Dust Devils There appears tobe similarity in some ofthe conditions which favor the development of whirls on some erratic fires and dust devils. These are strong surface heating on clear days, and winds ofnot more than moderate velocity. Ives (1947) gives the following account ofthe condi­ tions favorable for their formation: In geographically favorable areas dust devils occur most frequently in clear weather, when the surface has been heated for some hours, and there is little surface wind. Under these conditions the surface airis very hot with respect to that afew hundred feet aloft. Typically favorable conditions, measured during a “Great-Basin-High regime” are: surface temperature, 160 °F (71 °C); one foot (0.3m) above surface, 142 °F (61 °C); five feet (1.5m) above surface, 116 °F (47 °C); 500 feet (150m) above surface, 100 °F (38 °C); 2,000 feet (610m) above surface, 92 °F (33 °C). Such a pronounced drop intem­ perature means, of course, an extremely unstable atmosphere near the ground. Ives further states that the upward velocity ofthe airin a dust devil may exceed 35 miles per hour (56km/h) and that meas­ ured horizontal winds within the whirl can accelerate from near zero to speeds of from 50to more than 90 miles per hour (80–140+ km/h) and then return to their former velocity within 30to 100 seconds. Velocities within the whirls onthe southeastern fires are not known, but they are strong enough to carry burning embers for consider­ able distances ahead ofthe main fire. Williams (1948) gives the range in size for dust devils as varying from 20to 200 feet (6–60m) in diame­ ter and from 10to 4,000 feet (3–1,200m) in height. It thus appears that the largest dust devils occupy an area only about one- tenth as great asthe area ofthe larger whirls onthe South Carolina fires. The main difference between dust devils and whirls on fires is that the former must obtain allof their energy from the poten­ tial energy ofthe atmosphere, whereas the latter obtain their energy from burning fuel as well asthe atmosphere. Inthe same arti­ cle Williams states: These occurrence times were from 1to 5 hours before the times of maximum tempera­ tures. The reason for this fact is that the wind speeds nor­ mally increase asthe times of maximum temperatures are approached and certain criti­ cal speeds are reached beyond which the dust whirls cannot exist. These critical speeds have not yet been determined, but vary with lapse rate, topography, and probably other factors. Brown (1950) states that dust dev­ ils are an ominous sign to fire fighters. Whirls ofa similar nature on fires may account for many blow-ups. Lapse Rate is Related to Fire Control Ifthe conclusions reached regard­ ing the effect ofair turbulence on fire behavior are substantiated by
additional work (see the sidebar), anew aspect of fire control inthe Southeast will have been recog­ nized. Although erratic fires in this section may not be common, their potential danger to suppression crews and damage to timber stands, particularly inthe younger age classes, will justify the taking of extra precautions during espe­ cially hazardous periods. Radio­ sonde observations, where avail­ able, will be helpful but the extent ofthe adjacent area to which these apply will have tobe determined. Forecasts of high impending tur­ bulence aday ortwo in advance would be most useful, although a forewarning of even afew hours might mean considerable for the safety ofmen and equipment. Suppression crews during such periods could be alerted to make the fastest possible attack soas to restrict any fire tothe smallest possible acreage and before it reached the breaking point. In Although erratic fires inthe Southeast may not be common, their potential danger to suppression crews will justify taking extra precautions during especially hazardous periods. short, they could be warned to expect crowning and the sudden formation of large whirls, unusual backfire behavior, exceptional rates of spread considering existing wind velocities, gustiness and quick changes in wind direction, and the likelihood of danger even inmak­ ing flank attacks. It should be emphasized again that the changing fuel and stand types occurring inthe Southeast maybe a necessary condition for the large whirling fires which burned in South Carolina last year. These fires burned in dense stands of reproduction (predominantly loblolly pine) in which the compact crowns constituted the main source of fuel. In turn, the avail­ ability of this green fuel for com­ bustion was increased byan unsta­ ble atmosphere plus a high rate of energy release inthe ground fuels. References Brown, A.A. 1950. Warning signs for fire fighters. Fire Control Notes. 11(3): 28–30. Crosby, J.S.1949. Vertical wind currents and fire behavior. Fire Control Notes. 10(2): 12–15. Foley, J.C. 1947. A study of meteorological conditions associated with bush and grass fires and fire protection strategy in Australia. Commonwealth of Australia, Bureau of Meteorology, Bulletin. 38: 51–52. Ives, R.L. 1947. Behavior of dust devils. Bulletin ofthe American Meteorological Society. 28(4): 168–174. Williams, N.R. 1948. Development of dust whirls and similar small-scale vortices. Bulletin ofthe American Meteorological Society. 29(3): 106–117. ■ Additional Evidence Since this report was written, data have been obtained from the Weather Bureau which give the upper air temperatures atthe Charleston airport for all days inthe period from March 20to April 30. Although acom­ plete analysis has not yet been made, these data indicate that there were only eight days in this period with a highly unstable atmosphere. Four of these days were March 26, April 11, 17, and24 when severe whirling fires occurred. Onthe other four unstable days, no whirling fires were reported. On April 27, the atmosphere was very unsta­ bleat 10:00a.m., but0.41 inches (1.04cm) of rain fell later inthe day before 5:00p.m. Similar turbulent conditions existed on April 6and 27, but0.33 inch (0.84cm) of rain fell on April 5and 0.60 inches (1.52cm) on April 27and 28. The chances were very slight for fires starting and building upto a high rate of energy output on these days, especially in dense stands of young loblolly pine. On April 19 there wasa highly unsta­ ble layer of surface air but itwas only 150 feet (46m) deep. In addition, the next layer above was deep and sta­ ble. Itis doubtful if large whirling fires could develop on such aday. However, the shallow layer should have hada marked effect onthe behavior of small fires.
ITHE P INYON –J UNIPER FUEL TYPE CAN R EALLY BURN * Dwight A. Hester nthe Rocky Mountain Region, weare rapidly losing any illu­ sions that our fuel types areof the “asbestos” variety. Aspen used tobe considered fairly fireproof until certain crown fires, gathering speed in adjacent conifer stands, rolled through without loss of momentum. The moist, high-alti­ tude spruce type has been even more deceptive on disastrous occa­ sions. Butat the lower elevation, inthe southwestern part ofthe region, isthe familiar pinyon–juniper type, and this never gave any trouble. Most ofit is outside the national forest boundaries, andit is usually grazed so heavily that all fuel is gone except the trees themselves (fig. 1). The records show that our neighbor tothe south, the Mesa Verde National Park, hada big fire in such a type inthe drought-rid­ den thirties, but that seemed tobe a “one-in-a-million” occurrence. Unusual Conditions Then, in 1950, we suddenly found out that under extreme conditions the fuel-sparse pinyon–juniper type will not only burn, but will literally explode. Since this type is wide­ spread through the Southwest, perhaps other fire control person­ nel could profit byour experience. During the early part of June 1950, the weather was fair and dry in When this article was originally published, Dwight Hester wasa district ranger for the USDA Forest Servicae, Grand Mesa National Forest, CO. * The article is reprinted from Fire Control Notes 13(1) [Winter 1952]: 26–29. We soon learned that natural barriers, such as ridges, cliffs, and roads, were ofno value in heading off this type of fire. western Colorado. Land managers were not concerned since there had been normal snowfall during the winter, and the early spring had been cold, ifdry. The spruce type well above the pinyon–juniper still held considerable snow. By June 10the weather had turned warm, and strong winds came up with regularity during the after­ noons. Relative humidity was down to7 percent. Itwas during this period that a coal mine, abandoned and burning deep underground for some 20 years, chose to explode. This explo­ sion, according toan eyewitness, occurred at3:10p.m., and the fire seemed tobe inthe crowns at once. By5 p.m. the fire had trav­ eled about a mile (1.6km) “onthe back ofa strong wind” and showed no signs of abating (fig. 2). Extreme Fire Behavior We soon learned that natural barri­ ers, such as ridges, cliffs, and roads, were ofno value in heading off this type of fire. The country Figure 1—Typical pinyon–juniper type, showing scattered stand, sparse vegetation, and intermingled areas of bare ground. Photo: USDA Forest Service.
Figure 2—The fire as seen from a point 15 miles away, 2 hours after origin. Photo: USDA Forest Service. was too broken and rocky for bull­ dozers tobe used effectively. The shaggy bark ofthe juniper made fire brands to Satan’s liking. Flaming strips of this bark, often 2 feet (0.6m) or more in length, were hurled ahead to wrap them­ selves around other trees which caught fire with a roar and gave off ropelike strips of bark to repeat the process. Distance between trees and width of natural barriers seemed to have little influence on this type of spread. Inone instance, a cleared, 40-foot (12-m) fire lane was crossed inits entire length bythe fire without detectable hesitation. Backfiring was not practicable since the only fuel was standing trees which hadto be crowned outto burn, anda crowning juniper ina high wind isnot tobe fooled with. Not only can the fire explode dur­ ing the afternoon, itcan continue this blowup well into the night. Onour fire, the expected evening wind shift did not take place until about 8p.m. This occurred asa 90­ degree change of direction (a down-mountain draft) with no appreciable change in wind veloci­ ty, and the fire really rolled down­ hill. The rapid rate of spread con­ tinued until 11p.m., at which time the wind velocity fell from an esti­ mated 20to 30 miles per hour (32–48km/h) toa gentle breeze. Suppression Tactics Judging from the behavior ofour fire, I believe that the head of such a fire should notbe attacked until the crowning stops, unless there are means available for creating extremely wide barriers. Once the fire isout ofthe crowns, men can work relatively close tothe fire and can work in most ofthe burn with­ in2 hours. I believe the best betis to fell a swath of burning trees at least 100 yards (90m) wide, working from the edge toward the interior ofthe burn. One power saw per 4-man crew seems tobe the answer for this work. In this short-tree type 2men can operate the saw with a reasonable degree of safety, and the other 2 haul away the felled debris. Mop-up usually hasto be done with little orno water since much of this type is without “living” water ofany kind. Figure 3—The intensi­ tyof the fire denudes the soil toa point where watershed dam­ ageof long duration will result. Ditch and gully inthe foreground were cut before the area burned. Photo: USDA Forest Service. One cannot count onthe oak brush above the pinyon–juniper type to serve asa buffer. Onour fire, the oak brush, although only about one-half leafed out, burned readily and crowned outin most places. Aswas found in Maine in 1947, hardwoods are not immune to crowning. Fire Effects Although the bulk ofthe trees remain standing after the fire, the heat is quite intense and leaves the ground well cooked (fig. 3). Re­ growth ofany kind is bound tobe slow and erosion will bea problem. Onthe fire described, the wind started drifting the soil before the fire was out and continued throug­ hout the summer. Only two rain­ storms of relatively light intensity occurred during the summer, but small gullies were in evidence by fall. While our pinyon–juniper type can hardly be classified asa high fire risk, itis not fireproof. When con­ ditions are right, itcan be quite explosive, resulting in fires that are difficult to control. A burn in this type will be slow to heal and can result ina long-term watershed problem. ■
AF IREWHIRL OFT ORNADIC V IOLENCE * Howard E. Graham W hirlwinds occasionally have been reported occurring within various types of fires. Accounts sufficiently detailed to give the reader a definite idea of what the reporter had actually seen are rare. Since the fire-whirlwind isa phenomenon of considerable importance to fire fighters, I will attempt to describe one which was observed by Robert S. Stevens, Forester, Oregon State Board of Forestry, and myself at2 p.m., August 23, 1951, onthe Vincent Creek Fire in southwest Oregon. Figure 1 portrays the spectacular wind conditions. Tornado-Like Tube From our vantage point about 200 yards (180m) away itwas evident that violent whirling surface winds existed over a diameter of some 100to 200 feet (30–60m). Inthe middle of this circulation wasa dark tornado-like tube which extended upward, the top being obscured by drift smoke above approximately 1,000 feet (300m). The winds in this tube were so extreme that a green Douglas-fir tree, which at breast height was about 40 inches (100cm) in diam­ eter, was quickly twisted and bro­ ken off about 20 feet (6m) above the ground. Inthe area ofthe whirlwind, the fire flames leaped several times higher than those surrounding. A large tree top burst into flame like When this article was originally published, Howard Graham wasa meteorologist for the Fire Weather Service, U.S. Weather Bureau, Portland, OR. * The article is reprinted from Fire Control Notes 13(2) [Spring 1952]: 22–24. The winds in this tube were so extreme that a Douglas-fir, which at breast height was about 40 inches, was quickly twisted and broken off the flash ofa powder keg when the whirl passed by. Within the tube, gases and debris were moving upward ata high velocity. The whirling column remained nearly stationary during its activity, mov­ inga little more than 50 yards (45m). Had that not been the case, extremely rapid fire spread might have resulted. The whirlwind rap­ idly disappeared andas rapidly reformed a moment later, repeat­ ing this procedure at least 3 times during a10-minute interval. The general fire wason a50-per­ cent south–southwest slope. The trees were widely spaced with fuels consisting oflow brush, weeds, snags, and down logs typical ofan old burn in this region. The fire front was moving steadily along Figure 1—Diagram ofa fire-whirlwind observed onthe Vincent Creek Fire.
the contours and extended upthe entire slope, about one-half mile (0.8km) from topto bottom. Flames along the front were about 5 feet (1.5m) in height. Shorter flames persisted toa distance of about 50 feet (15m) behind. A slight spur ridge projected from the slope so that updrafts were moving from both the south and the southwest into the area ofthe whirlwind. The fire-whirlwind developed afew feet behind the fire front 150 yards (140m) from the summit ofthe main ridge andon the spur ridge. Atmospheric Instability The meteorological condition ofthe atmosphere was one of condi­ tional instability. Overturning ofthe airin the lower layers could readily occur ifthe surface were heated sufficiently. No cumulus clouds were tobe seen. Winds at ridge top were north–northeast from 10to 15 miles per hour (16–24km/h). Above the ridge top level, winds were from north– northwest to north–northeast and ranged from 8to 16 miles per hour (13–26km/h) upto 10,000 feet (3,000m). The relative humidity was46 percent and the tempera­ ture 67ºF (19ºC), neither of which was unusual. There has been much written on various types of whirlwinds and their causes. Much isyet tobe learned. Meteorologists know that these whirlwinds are present only where the atmosphere isin apar­ ticular condition of unstable equi­ librium—where the temperature decreases so rapidly with height that the warmer air below, being lighter than the cooler air above it, Meteorologists know that these whirlwinds are present only where the atmosphere isin a particular condition of unstable equilibrium. tends to rise, and conversely, the cooler air aloft tends to sink. The result is intensive vertical currents throughout the unstable layer. In this case, we have the heat from the fire which caused the unstable conditions. However, this isan entirely normal situation over a large fire. Since these violent fire- whirlwinds are infrequent, there must be some condition other than heating to cause their formation. Perhaps the answer lies inthe interplay of wind currents and topography. Interplay of Wind/Topography Inthe case under discussion, con­ sider the position ofthe whirl near the top ofa sunlit south–southwest slope where itwas fedby upslope drafts from the south and south­ west inthe surface layers. Above the level ofthe ridge the rising currents from the fire were played upon bythe prevailing gentle to moderate north–northeasterly wind. Perhaps herein lies the answer. There were two opposing air cur­ rents with a column of rapidly ris­ ing gases between. This isan ideal condition for the formation of mechanically induced eddy cur­ rents. An eddy current, once start­ ed, might be sustained bythe ener­ gyof the rising hot gases. This the­ oryis substantiated bythe repeated reappearance ofthe fire-whirlwind inthe same spot. Asthe leading edge ofthe main fire progressed, the fuels inthe area ofthe whirl were consumed and the volume and heat ofthe ascending gases became apparently insufficient to support the whirlwind. Asthe fire moved onto new fuel and new topographic features no further disturbance was noted. From this analysis it would seem likely that there are certain ideal combinations of conditions under which this type of fire-whirlwind of extreme violence might occur. The necessary factors seem tobe for the fire tobe onthe lee slope shel­ tered from the prevailing ridge top winds, a moderate or stronger wind atthe ridge top, and strong converging surface updraft cur­ rents along the burning orsun- heated slopes. More Accounts Needed It would be desirable to have the necessary combination of condi­ tions more positively identified so that fire fighters could learn to anticipate at least this one type of blow-up fire behavior. Additional detailed accounts of similar phe­ nomena would contribute tothe understanding of their causes and their effects on fire behavior. These accounts should attempt to describe the topography, surface wind, ridge top wind, fire intensity, cloud types, smoke column charac­ teristics, and the intensity ofthe fire-whirlwind. ■
RATE OFS PREAD ONAW ASHINGTON FERN FIRE * William G. Morris Rate of spread, fuel moisture, and climatic conditions were measured onthe 4,000-acre (1,600-ha) Livingston Mountain fire east of Vancouver, WA, on April 11and 12, 1951. In behavior, this fire typified many early spring fires on cutover areas inthe foothill zone ofthe Douglas-fir region. Some ofthe measurements of rate of spread will be given asan exam­ pleof this type of fire. Burning Conditions The fire burned across a gentle to moderate south-facing slope that extended some 3 miles (5km) from level farmland tothe topof a broad hill, 1,500 feet (460m) higher. Atthe steepest points, the slope was about 40 percent. Asin much ofthe foothill country, ground cover was mostly western bracken fern, intermingled with annual weeds, trailing blackberry, and salal, an evergreen shrub 6to 15 inches (15–38cm) high. In this locality, bracken grows toa height of2-1/2 feet (76cm) and forms a dense ground cover. In April, how­ ever, the dead crowns are bent tothe ground and form a loose, flashy fuel about 1 foot (30cm) deep. Hazel brush, about 8 feet (2.4m) tall and not yetin leaf, formed a sparse overstory. Here and there pole-size Douglas-fir had survived When this article was originally published, William Morris wasa forester for the USDA Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Forest and Range Experiment Station, Portland, OR. * The article is reprinted from Fire Control Notes 15(1) [Winter 1954]: 32–34. In behavior, this fire typified many early spring fires on cutover areas inthe foothill zone ofthe Douglas-fir region. previous fires and occurred in large blocks, small patches, oras single trees. Scattered Douglas-fir seed­ lings and saplings were also pres­ entin some areas of bracken and brush. The weather was unusually favor­ able for fires. The preceding 10 days had been clear and unseason­ ably warm with dry winds. Before this period, rainfall had been nor­ mal. On April 11the relative humidity fell to14 percent, and wind speed measured with a portable anemometer 6 feet (1.8m) above the ground was consis­ tently 18to 20 miles per hour (29–32km/h). Moisture content of dead bracken fuel was9 percent or less even though the soil was still moist 1/4 inch (6.4mm) below the surface. Rapid Rates of Spread Lineal spread and contributing fac­ tors were measured on heads and flanks ofthe sprawling, irregular fire. Measurements were taken mostly during short periods when wind speed, direction of spread, topography, and fuels were fairly uniform. Spread was usually meas­ ured fora distance of50 feet (15m) or less although occasionally for0.1to 0.5 mile (0.16–0.8km). On April 11, when the wind speed was18 to20 miles per hour (29–32km/h) and the relative humidity was16 percent, rates of spread beyond the shelter of trees varied from 660 feet per hour to7,900 feet per hour (200–2,400m/h) (table 1). On April 12, when the wind speed was7 to8 miles per hour (11–13km/h) and the relative humidity was26 percent, rates of spread beyond the shelter of trees varied from 80 feet per hour to1,600 feet per hour (24–490m/h) (table 2). On April 11the fire spread sorap­ idly that control through flank attack would have required con­ struction of control line ata rate of more than 1/2 mile per hour (0.8km/h) along both flanks. During short periods when flames rose inthe crowns of scattered conifers and embers flew far ahead, more than 1-1/2 miles of control line would have tobe constructed per hour (2.4km/h). In flash fuel of this kind, a frontal attack with a slower rate of line construction could be effectively used to check the head ofthe fire. Typical Rates of Spread Although effects of wind speed and relative humidity cannot be sepa­ rated in these observations, rate of spread apparently increased 4to 5 times when wind speed increased 2-1/2 times and was accompanied byan appreciable drop in relative
humidity. Measurements on many Northwest. Spread isof course slash of these forests, rate of spread other fires show that a lineal grater on steep slopes. is greater than shown in table 2 spread of400 to900 feet per hour owing to large numbers of wind­ (120–270m/h), as recorded inIn the litter ofthe normally dense borne embers that set new fires far table 2, is typical of fires in brush, coniferous forests, rate of spread isin advance ofthe surface fire. ■ bracken, and weed cover on nearly a small fraction of that shown in level ground inthe Pacific table 2. Inthe unburned logging Table 1—Rates of spread and contributing factors measured ona Washington fern fire April 11, 1951. Rate of lineal spread (ft/h) Position on fire Direction of spread with reference to slope Slope a (percent) Remarks 7,900 Head — 0 Crowns of scattered conifers afire. Spotted ahead. Measured on0.1-mi spread. 3,300do — 0No spotting. 2,400 Flank Down 15 Spread only 350ft/hour while flames drew inward just previous to this measurement. Drafts then became turbulent and flames surged outward. 2,400 Head — 0 — 2,400do Down 25 Some spotting. Measured on0.3-mi spread. 2,100do — 0 Some spotting. Measured on0.5-mi spread. 1,320 Flank Down 15 — 1,320 Head — 0 Flames 6–8ft high and intermittently drawing outward or inward. 1,320do Down 10 Measured on0.5-mi spread. 1,000do — 0 — 800 Flank — 0 — 660do — 0 — 400 Head — 0In dense stand of Douglas-fir50 ft tall. Wind at treetops about 20mph, andat 6 feet above ground, 4mph. Fire spread in twig litter 2–3in deep and produced a blazing border 4ft wide in which flames were vertical and less than 2ft high. 100do — 0 Same stand and wind as above. Flames drew inward toward fire and formed a border only 1ft wide. Note: Wind, east 18–20mph; relative humidity, 16%; temperature, 71ºF to75 ºF. a South aspect.
A lineal spread of400 to900 feet per hour is typical of fires in brush, bracken, and weed cover on nearly level ground inthe Pacific Northwest. Table 2—Rates of spread and contributing factors measured ona Washington fern fire April 12, 1951. Rate of lineal spread (ft/h) Position on fire Direction of spread with reference to slope Slope a (percent) Remarks 1,580 Head Up5 Spread at right angles to overhead wind. The flames, 1–3ft in height, drew outward although just previous to this measurement they drew inward. 990do — 0 — 730do — 0 — 630do Down 10 (E) — 530do — 0 Flames 1–3ft high in strip 2ft wide drew inward. 500do Down 10 (E) — 360do — 0 — 340 Flank — 0 — 280 Head Down 10 (E) — 200do Up5 Spread at right angles to overhead wind. 150do Up5 Spread at right angles to overhead wind. Flames drew inward. 130 Rear — 0 Bracken flattened to3-in layer. 120 Head Up5 Spread at right angles to overhead and wind. Flames drew inward. 110 Flank Up5 — 80 Head Up5 Do. Note: Wind, west 7–8mph; relative humidity, 26%; temperature, 77ºF. a South aspect, except for three observations (indicated by “E”) on east aspects.
FIRE -W HIRLWIND F ORMATION ASF AVORED BYT OPOGRAPHY ANDU PPER W INDS * Howard E. Graham A fire started ata logging oper­ ation during the afternoon of October l, 1952. Toward evening the size had slowly increased to20 acres (8ha). About 9:30p. m. the fire suddenly became a raging inferno as whirling winds formed within the fire and abruptly multiplied its speed to such strength that chunks of wood and bark upto 8 inches (20cm) in diameter were thrown about like straws. Logger fire fight­ ers fled for their lives. Within min­ utes the fire raced though un­ burned areas for half a mile (0.8km), increasing to240 acres (100ha). The whirling winds remained over the fire for about an hour, hurling burning embers for con­ siderable distances and preventing the loggers from pressing their attack (table 1, whirlwind 4). Firewhirls and Large Fires Fire whirlwind isa phenomenon that has been known tobe associ­ ated with large fires (whirlwinds 1, 2, and3) (Hissong 1926). Ithas become more common in recent years inthe Northwest asa result ofthe increase in number ofnec­ essary slash burning operations. In another fire that occurred November 8, 1952, a Crown Zellerback fire patrolman was making a routine 8:30a.m. visit to When this article was originally published, Howard Graham wasa fire-weather fore­ caster with theU.S. Weather Bureau, Portland, OR. * The article is reprinted from Fire Control Notes 18(1) [Winter 1957]: 20–24. Local violent winds, frequently whirlwinds, have many times caused unusually rapid fire spread due both to direct fanning andto spotting. a nearly cold 2-acre (0.8-ha) slash fire onthe west slope ofthe Washington Cascades near the Columbia Gorge. Although the lookout ona ridge a short distance eastward reported east winds from 50to 60 miles per hour (80–96km/h), these winds had not been hitting the fire area. Suddenly an intense whirlwind formed in adja­ cent green timber and passed over the dormant slash fire. The fire leaped to life with an eruption of sparks and flame and ran for over a mile (1.6km) finally joining a second fire (whirlwind 9). Fire whirlwinds have received lit­ tle attention from meteorologists, probably because such winds are usually observed only by foresters and fire fighters who are too busy fighting fires to make detailed weather observations. With greater attention being given tothe study of blowup fires (whirlwinds 1and 4), itis fitting that this particular type of violent fire behavior be explored from both the empirical and theoretical standpoints. Winds areof great concern to fire fighters. Fire spread isa function of wind speed, although nota sim­ ple function. Local violent winds, frequently whirlwinds, have many times caused unusually rapid fire spread due both to direct fanning andto spotting. A typical fire whirlwind frequently hasa central tube made visible by whirling smoke and debris. Extreme varia­ tions in height, diameter, and intensity are common. Witnesses have described fire whirlwind diameters from afew feet to sever­ al hundred feet and heights from afew feet to about 4,000 feet (1,200m). Intensity varies from that ofa dust devil toa whirlwind that pitches logs about and snaps off large trees (Graham 1952). Velocities inthe vortex are extremely high, and, asin other forms of whirlwinds, the greatest speed occurs near the center. A strong vertical current atthe cen­ teris capable of raising burning debris to great heights. Favorable Topographic Features The28 fire whirlwinds that form the basis for this discussion were all observed in mountainous ter­ rain. Their individual characteris­ tics are indicated in table 1. Ofthe 28 whirlwinds, 20 occurred onlee slopes, 1 under calm conditions, 2 with wind at right angles tothe slope, and4 on windward slopes. Ofthe several additional whirl­ winds described tothe author and not included in table 1, all occurred onlee slopes. The mechanical action of airflow over a mountain isa factor in fire
510 1520 25 Whirls Relation Ridgetop wind Size of debris wind to Whirlwind Date, hour a Number Duration Diameter Height picked up topography Direction Velocity 17/20/51, 1600 12 h1,200ft 2,500ft logs, lee slope N — 30in by30 ft2 8/23/51, 1400 310 min 200 ft1,000ft large tree lee slope N–NE10–15mph broken off3 9/21/51, 1300 11 h200 ft4,000ft logs, lee slope N–NE — 15in by15 ft4 10/1/52, 2140 Several Several min50 ft200 ft6- to8-inlee slope E30 mph each for1 h chunks 10/15/52, 1500 Several each 30sec 40ft 150ft 3by 4lee slope NE10 mphby 16in 610/24/52, 1030 Several each 30sec 40ft 300ft log, lee slope E10 mph12 inby 16ft 710/25/52, 1100 Several each 2min 20ft 150ft bark, ridgetop W — 2by 4by 12in 811/4/52, 1400 1few min Unknown Unknown Unknown parallel toSW 10mph contours 911/8/52, 0830 1 Unknown Unknown Unknown small debris lee slope E50–60mph 11/8/52, 1500 11 h5 ft100 ft small sticks lee slope E10 mph11 9/ ?/53, 1100 110 min50 ft100 ft small limbs and snapped tree top, 8- to10-in diameter flat clam — 129/16/53, 1345 12 min75 ft125 ft bark and wood, lee slope S–SW4 mph4–5lb 139/21/53, 1530 13/4h 25ft 100ft 6- to8-in diameter lee slope SW15 mph14 9/29/53, 1000 Several each 30–60sec 10ft 50ft upto 8sq in windward SW10 mph9/29/53, 1130 11-1/2h 400ft 400ft upto 3by 3in leeW 2mph 1610/3/53, 1600 Several each 2min 10ft 30ft upto 15lb windward? E30 mph for 8h 1710/4/53, 1150 Several 3min 40ft 300ft 2by 6by 18in and lee slope NE5 mpha cedar post 1810/6/53, 1530 11-1/2h 50ft 200ft Unknown calm calm — 1910/6/53, 1530 Several 1/2h 20ft 60ft bark, 4by 6in lee slope E8 mph10/7/53, 1500 Several each 30sec 30ft 100ft 1-1/2in diameter windward? SW10 mph21 10/8/53, 1600 Several each 4–20sec 10ft 200ft under 11b windward W10 mph for 4h 2210/9/53, 1640 18 min 140 ft170 ft2 by6 by24 inlee slope NE5 mph and larger 2310/9/53, 2000 Several 1–2min each 75ft 100ft 1by 2by 3in lee slope SW10–15mph for2 h24 10/10/53, 1730 51 h50 ft125 ft large sparks lee slope W5 mph10/13/53, 1830 Several 1min each 30ft 200ft small twigs lee slope W8 mph26 10/15/53, 1500 Several each 1–2min 50ft 150ft branches and bark lee slope W5 mph for 1h 2710/29/53, 1830 110 min 100 ft80 ft bark and limb, lee slope N3 mph4 by5 in28 10/29/53, 1500 Several each 10sec to30 ft60 ft large material lee slope W5 mph4 min for 2h including a20-lb piece of sheet metal a Pacific standard time.
whirlwind formation. Aerodynamic Fire whirlwinds have become more common theory tells us that favorable condi­ in recent years inthe Northwest asa result tions for the starting ofa whirl ofthe increase in number of necessary occur where abrupt edges of mountainous terrain create shear slash burning operations. inthe air stream. Ashas been found true with dust devils, shear­ ing motion is undoubtedly a major factor in whirl formation. Although mountainous terrain provides many topographic situations favor­ able to fire whirlwind occurrence, the fact that itis notan essential condition is indicated by several examples which occurred on flat­ land in Eastern United States (Byram and Nelson 1951). Meteorological Aspects Dust devils are normal in flat areas when the wind speed islow and the lapse rate is steep, i.e., relatively rapid temperature decrease with height. Fire whirlwinds also appear to depend upon steep lapse rates inthe layer near the ground. RoyR. Silen, Pacific Northwest Forest and Range Experiment Station forester, moved a fire whirlwind downhill by rolling debris against the fuel inthe hot spot over which ithad formed. Asthe hottest portion ofthe fire was carried down the slope, the fire whirlwind followed. Fire whirlwind occurrence seems tobe directly related tothe local thermal instability setup bythe fire and not otherwise relieved. The degree of upper air stability as indicated bythe lapse rate between 850 and 500 millibars, i.e., pres­ sure surfaces near 5,000 feet and18,000 feet (1,500–5,500m), at nearby weather stations has little orno effect on fire whirlwind occurrence. Data onthe lapse rate at lower levels is unavailable. Obviously the lapse rate inthe lower level over the fire is extreme­ ly unstable because of intense heat­ ing near the ground. The distribution of upper air wind velocities also was checked from pilot balloon data atthe nearest weather station. The results showed that 75 percent ofthe whirlwinds reviewed occurred, with winds of less than 17 miles per hour (27km/h) below the5,000-foot (1,500-m) level. This isto be expected since the majority of whirlwinds were on controlled burns. The remaining 25 percent showed rapid wind speed increase with height. The wind speed profiles areof variable shape and show no typical occur­ rence ofthe “jet point” discussed by Byram (1954) with relation to blowup fires. Mountain Barriers and Their Effects on Airflow The upper endof a fire whirlwind when ona lee slope near a ridgetop seems to extend into a region oflow pressure that occurs inthe vicinity ofa ridgetop whenever windflow isat right angles tothe ridge. This follows the Bernoulli principle which states that changes in pressure are inversely propor­ tional to changes in fluid velocity. Pilots are taught this principle asthe explanation altimeter errors experienced over mountains. The theory of pressure reduction along a ridge oriented at right angles tothe direction of airflow is well supported by evidence. According toaU.S. Weather Bureau study of strong winds over mountain barriers, the pressure reduction over a mountain crest was proportional tothe square ofthe wind speed. Where the air was saturated, the pressure deficiency was nearly doubled. The greatest pressure deficiency occurred along a mountain barrier with a ridge profile corresponding tothe upper surface ofan airfoil where the maximum drop would be near the topmost part ofthe airfoil camber. Theoretically a topographic barrier should best approximate an airfoil when the lee slope is less than 33 percent and relatively smooth. This corresponds very closely tothe upper limits ofthe change in direction of airflow over the upper surface of airfoils on slow speed airplanes. Conclusion Because ofthe direct relationship between fire whirlwind occurrence and combustion heat, the meteor­ ologist can predict likely areas of occurrence only ifhe is familiar with both the attendant meteoro­ logical and topographic conditions and the occurrence of heavy fuel concentrations. The forester with intimate knowledge of areas under his management will usually be more able to predict combustion heat over a given area. Fire whirlwinds seem to develop more readily onlee slopes close to ridgetops. Itis suggested that this is favored by pressure deficiencies resulting from flow over anThe most favorable condition for fire whirlwind occurrence is over ahot fire near the top ofa steep lee slope with strong winds over the ridgetop. abruptly terminating airfoil. The wind velocity above the ridgetop thus becomes an important factor in determining the likelihood and magnitude ofa whirlwind. Wemay conclude that the most favorable condition for fire whirl­ wind occurrence is over ahot fire near the top ofa steep lee slope with strong winds over the ridgetop. Fire whirlwinds are fre­ quently characterized by destruc­ tive violence. Therefore when any fire—large or small, quiet orrun­ ning—ison alee slope, the fire fighters should consider the danger of fire whirlwind formation. References Byram, G.M. 1954. Atmospheric conditions related to blowup fires. Sta. Pap. 35. Asheville, NC: USDA Forest Service, Southeastern Forest Experiment Station. Byram, G.M.; Nelson, R.M. 1951. The possi­ ble relation ofair turbulence to erratic fire behavior inthe Southeast. Fire Control Notes. 12(3): 1–8. Graham, H.E. 1952. A fire-whirlwind of tornadic violence. Fire Control Notes. 13(2): 22–24. Hissong, J.E. 1926. Whirlwinds atoil-tank fire, San Luis Obispo, Calif. Monthly Weather Review. 54: 161–163. ■ Fire Whirlwinds Studied inthe Lab* Because of their importance asa hazard to firefighters andas a cause of rapid and erratic fire spread, fire whirlwinds are one ofthe fire behavior phenomena being studied atthe Southern Forest Fire Laboratory in Macon, Ga. These whirlwinds canbe produced readily ona small scale and studied by modeling techniques. *See Byram, G.M.; Martin, R.E. 1962. Fire whirlwinds inthe laboratory. Fire Control Notes. 23(1) [Winter 1962]: 13–17.
R ELATIONSHIP OFW EATHER F ACTORS TOR ATEOF S PREAD OFTHE R OBIE C REEK FIRE * R.T. Small Original editor’s note: The Robie Creek Fire inthe Boise National Forest, ID, September 5–9, 1955, is described, and concurrent weather conditions are analyzed. The fire exhibits four different types of behavior during the5 days. On four ofthe days, the behavior fol­ lows patterns previously recog­ nized as being usually associated with the prevailing weather condi­ tions. The exceptions occur onthe third day, which is meteorological­ ly similar tothe second day but exhibits a different fire behavior. Some implications that this study has for forecasting and research are pointed out. Many observations have been made regarding the cause of forest and range fire spread anda number of well-qualified men have made investigations and contributed valuable reports and technical papers on this complex subject. There is general agreement that weather isthe most important variable in fire spread, and that the conditions which lead to “blowups” are very complex and difficult to predict. This paper consists ofa report ofthe weather conditions which existed during the Robie Creek Fire inthe Boise National Forest, Idaho, September 5–9, 1955, and When this article was originally published, R. T. Small was with the Weather Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce, Boise, ID. * The article is reprinted from Fire Control Notes 18(4) [Fall 1957]: 143–150. Itis an abridged version ofan article under the same title inthe January 1951 issue of Monthly Weather Review. The greatest blowup potential is when the wind reaches maximum speed within the first 1,000 feet above the fire and then decreases in speed with elevation. an analysis ofthe relationship of those conditions tothe fire behav­ ior. There are several reasons why this fire adapts itself toan analysis of this type: (1) The fire occurred only 10to 15 airline miles (16–24km) northeast ofthe Boise Weather Bureau Airport Station (WBAS) where regular surface and upper air observations are made. (2) The fire area was bracketed bytwo fire- weather stations, Shafer Butte Lookout, six miles north of Robie Creek atan elevation of7,590 feet (2,313m), and Idaho City Ranger Station some 12 miles (19km) northeast ofthe fire, atan eleva­ tion of3,950 feet (1,204m), inthe main Mores Creek drainage. (3) The fire went through four differ­ ent types of behavior-day: a blowup, a long run, a potentially critical but quiet day, anda quiet day. Description ofthe Fire The Robie Creek Fire inthe Boise National Forest started inthe early afternoon of Labor Day, September 5, 1955. Itwas ahot, dry day; the 45th day since there was measura­ ble precipitation in that area and the 21st consecutive day with the maximum temperature above nor­ mal. The maximum temperature at nearby Idaho City Ranger Station that day was 101°F (38ºC) and the relative humidity was6 percent resulting ina very high fire danger (Burning Index of72 onthe Forest Service Model 8 Meter). The fire apparently started onthe east side ofthe Boise Ridge andat a point ona minor slope exposed tothe southeast. The point of igni­ tion wasin well-cured grass ina light stand of chokeberry brush. Fuel inthe general area consisted mostly ofdry grass, several kinds of brush, and second growth pon­ derosa pine. The fire started atan elevation of about 5,000 feet (1,500m), but eventually spread over an elevation range from 4,000to 5,500 feet (1,200–1,700m). Although winds were light and variable, the other factors were very conducive to fire spread. Within 2 hours ofthe time that fire began there were 15to 20peo­ ple from the nearby Karney Lakes Resort, four smokejumpers, anda crew of20 trained fire fighters atthe scene, but the rate of spread wasso great that the fire fighters hadto retreat from the fire area. The fire started on Monday, September 5, and was brought under control on Friday, Septem­ ber9. Ofthe 5 days, major runs or “blowups” occurred on3 days: Monday, Tuesday, and Thursday.
Forecasters on large fires should consider carefully the wind speed profiles and surface temperature distribution as well as temperature lapse rates and other observational material. On Wednesday there were minor flareups, butno sustained run occurred. There was very little spread on Friday as established lines were widened and mopup commenced (fig. 1). During the5 days the fire spread over 8,310 acres (3,363ha) ofpri­ vate and national-forest land. Atthe peak ofthe attack over 700 men were employed and total sup­ pression costs were in excess of $100,000. Weather Conditions Inthe attempt to determine which weather parameters had the most influence onthe fire behavior dur­ ing the 5-day period, comparisons were made ofthe various weather data. The upper air measurements give the values of temperature and humidity at different heights. The decrease in temperature with alti­ tude is called the lapse rate. When this value becomes 5-1/2 °Fper 1,000 feet (10 °C/1,000m) the lapse rate is known asthe dry adia­ batic lapse rate. With lapse rates considerably less than dry adiabat­ ic, the atmosphere is more stable. Where the lapse rate approaches oris greater than the dry adiabatic rate the air becomes unstable and upward motion is greatly in­ creased. Onthe assumption that stability would bean important factor, a comparison was made ofthe twice- daily Boise radiosonde observations (fig. 2). The lapse rate was very nearly dry adiabatic on Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday and only more stable on Thursday and Friday. Figure 1—Total area ofthe Robie Creek Fire showing location where fire started on Monday, September 5, 1955, and its spread on succeeding days. Grid interval equals 1 mile (1.6km). Plotting the maximum surface temperatures at Shafer Butte, Idaho City, and Boise WBAS onthe soundings show that superadiabat­ ic lapse rates existed on Monday and Tuesday near the surface, but the layer near the surface was more stable on Wednesday and Thursday. The surface conditions as shown in table 1 reveal that the weather was hot and dry all5 days, but that there wasa definite cooling on Thursday and Friday. The wind speed profiles for the 0800 mountain standard time (MST) and 1400 MST Boise winds aloft observations are shown infig­ ure3. The wind speeds over 7,000 feet (2,134m) above mean sea level increased gradually during the first 4 days ofthe fire and then slacked off again atthe endof the week. Fire Behavior The fire behavior on Monday was very similar to that of Tuesday and most ofthe weather data were strikingly similar on those 2 days, except for minor changes inthe winds aloft patterns. Monday and Tuesday both had some ofthe characteristics associ­ ated with a blowup pattern; i.e., steep lapse rates, high tempera­ tures, low humidity, dry fuel, and relatively light winds aloft. On both Monday and Tuesday the major spread occurred inthe mid­ dle and late afternoon and was accompanied bya nearly vertical smoke column which was topped bya well-developed cumulus cloud. Both Monday night and Tuesday night the smoke filled the surrounding valleys and remained low until upslope motion
Figure 2—Radiosonde temperature observations at Weather Bureau Airport Station Boise, Idaho, during period of Robie Creek Fire. Daily maximum temperatures for Shafer Butte Lookout, Idaho City Ranger Station, and Boise Airport are plotted at their relative elevations. commenced at 1000 MSTon Tuesday and 1100 MST Wednesday. On Wednesday the fire spread over only about 500 additional acres (200ha) compared to over 3,000 acres (1,200ha) on Tuesday. However, the temperature lapse rate was almost as steep ason the previous 2 days and the minimum relative humidity at Idaho City and Shafer Butte was the same ason Tuesday. There were minor changes in maximum temperature with a drop of6 °F (3.3ºC) at Shafer Butte and8 °F (4.5ºC) at Idaho City. Winds aloft were weak­ erat low elevations and stronger at high elevations as shown bythe wind speed profiles. On Wednesday there wasno towering cloud- capped smoke column, only small areas of billowing smoke during the afternoon. In contrast tothe previous nights, the fire continued to spread during the night, espe­ cially near the ridgetops, and there was very little smoke hanging inthe valleys Thursday morning. On Thursday cooler air was obvi­ ously moving into the fire area with moderate westerly winds across the Boise Ridge and down onto the fire. Inthe early morning the fire was moving rapidly upthe slopes exposed tothe west, and throughout the morning and after­ noon the fire continued to spread inan easterly direction. Maximum temperatures were down about 20F° (11ºC) from Tuesday and mini­ mum relative humidity wasup 10to 20 percent. Although the fire covered nearly as great an area on this dayas on Tuesday the behavior was different. The wind was rela­ tively consistent in both speed and direction and the fire moved from west to east, up slope and down. The forest officials described itas more ofa steady “push” than a blowup. The smoke column leaned tothe east and although small cumulus tops appeared frequently they disappeared almost as quickly as they formed. On Friday winds were light and variable, temperatures were about the same ason Thursday, and the relative humidity was higher by5 to10 percent. Inthe afternoon afew minor dust whirls were visible Table 1—The maximum temperature and 1600 mountain standard time relative humidity for the 5 days ofthe Robie Creek Fire, Boise National Forest, ID, September 5–9, 1955. Boise Weather Bureau Airport Station Idaho City Ranger Station Shafer Butte Day Max. temp. Rel. humidity Max. temp. Rel. humidity Max. temp. Rel. humidity Monday 97 °F24% 101 °F6% 84 °F12% Tuesday 98 °F23% 100 °F12% 83 °F14% Wednesday 97 °F17% 92 °F12% 77 °F14% Thursday 81 °F27% 80 °F19% 62 °F34% Friday 80 °F30% 81 °F25% 62 °F40%
Ifit were possible to dispatch a mobile radiosonde light to medium fuels. Byram has classified the wind speed profiles observational unit to large fires the information into four main types, each with gained would be very valuable tothe forecaster twoor more subtypes (fig. 3). in predicting fire behavior. inthe ashes and smoke stumps, butat no time was there a serious flareup or threat tothe firelines. By this time the suppression attack was organized and lines were well established and manned. Discussion Arnold and Buck (1954) have listed five atmospheric situations under which fire blowups may occur: 1. Fire burning under a weak inversion. 2. Fire burning inhot air beneath a cool air mass. 3. Combustible gases from a fire accumulating near the ground. 4. Fire exposed toa steady-flow convection wind. 5. Fire burning near a cell of verti­ cal air circulation. The rapid spread on Monday and Tuesday corresponded to situation 5, and the conditions on Thursday seemed tofit situation 4. On Monday and Tuesday there appeared tobe a “chimney effect” reaching toan estimated 25,000to 30,000 feet (7,600–9,100m) which induced a strong draft atthe base ofthe column. Byram (1954) states that for the greatest blowup potential the wind should reach a maximum within the first 1,000 feet (300m) above the fire and then decrease in speed with elevation for the next several thousand feet. He refers to this point of maximum wind speed immediately above the fire asthe “jet point” and states that the wind speed near the jet point for most dangerous fires will be18 to24 miles per hour (29–39km/h) for Figure 3—Daily winds aloft observations taken at Weather Bureau Airport Station, Boise, during period of Robie Creek Fire (upper graphs) compared with Byram’s wind speed pro­ file types. In comparing the wind speed pro­ files ofthe 1400 MST Boise winds aloft reports for the 5 days of this discussion we find that the profile for Monday resembles Byram’s Type 1-a except for wind speed. The wind blowing up slope tended to offset this low velocity. The wind speed profile at 1400 MSTon Tuesday for Boise closely resembles Byram’s Type 3-a with the jet point just above the fire zone. This type has strong winds at high levels, but with a layer of decreasing speed just above the jet point. Byram says of this particular profile “fora fire near 7,000 feet (2,100m) it resembles the danger­ ous Type 1-aand itis doubtful ifthe wind speeds at high levels are strong enough to shear off the con­ vection column.” Type 3-aand 3-bmay be accompanied by strong whirlwinds and rapid fire spread when jet point winds are20 miles per hour (32km/h) or more. The winds atthe jet point level at Boise WBAS were below Byram’s mini- ma, but speeds must have been higher just above the fire. Fire crews reported spotting as much asa quarter ofa mile (0.4km) ahead ofthe fire Tuesday afternoon which would indicate some ofthe whirl­ wind activity mentioned by Byram. On Wednesday the wind speed pro­ file resembles Byram’s Type 1-b, except that wind speeds inthe fire zone were much below the limits shown. The strong winds above 10,000 feet (3,000m) would tend to prevent formation ofa convec­ tion column which might induce strong winds atthe surface. Colson (1956) states “the convection
column will not attain great heights ifthe wind speed increases too rapidly with height. Too strong a wind speed may cause the col­ umnto be broken away from its energy source.” Byram’s Type 4-a resembles the wind speed profile and also the fire behavior on Thursday. Regarding Type 4-a Byram states “fires were intense and fast-spreading, but they could notbe considered dan­ gerous to experienced crews, nor were there any erratic and unusual aspects to their behavior.” The speed profile at 1400 MSTon Friday closely resembles Byram’s Type 2-a, but other conditions reduced the fire danger. The fire behavior on Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, and Friday fol­ lowed previously recognized pat­ terns usually associated with the prevailing weather variables. How­ ever, the meteorological similarity between Tuesday and Wednesday was remarkable while the fire behavior was very different. Follow­ ingis a comparison ofthe 2 days: 1. Fuel conditions on Wednesday were essentially the same ason Tuesday with fuel remaining onall sides ofthe fire. Lines had been established on some ofthe fire boundary, but the long run the following day indicates that the spread potential was present. 2. Figure 2 indicates that stability was not the prime differentiating factor. 3. When the maximum surface temperatures at Idaho City, Shafer Butte, and Boise were plotted onthe tephigram with the Boise radiosonde observa­ tions (fig. 2) it appeared that there must have been a supera­ diabatic lapse rate near the sur­ face at Idaho City and Shafer Butte on Monday and Tuesday which was not nearly sopro­ nounced on Wednesday. This superheating effect wasat a maximum on Monday and Tuesday, wasat a minimum on Wednesday, and gradually increased again on Thursday and Friday. 4. Minimum relative humidity was the same both days. 5. Maximum temperatures were the same at Boise and5 °Fto 8 °F (2.7–4.5ºC) lower at Idaho City and Shafer Butte on Wednesday, but that change in itself hardly seems great enough tobe critical. 6. The winds aloft at Boise WBAS show minor differences in direc­ tion onthe 2 days, but wind speed profiles (fig. 3) varied con­ siderably. Byram’s wind speed profile types are different for the 2 days and they offer a possible explanation for the variation in fire behavior between the2 days. Conclusions The principal objective inan analy­ sisof this type isto develop means of improving forecast and warning techniques. Byram’s wind speed profiles have considerable merit, asthe evidence has shown, but, from a forecaster’s standpoint, it would be difficult to separate the blowup days from the quiet days onthe basis of projected 0800 MST wind speed profiles. This isa field in which a further study seems war­ ranted. This study indicates that the fore­ casters on large fires should con­ sider carefully the wind speed pro­ files and surface temperature dis­ tribution as well as temperature lapse rates, surface weather charts, and other observational material. Ifit were possible to dispatch amo­ bile radiosonde observational unit to large fires the information gained would be very valuable tothe forecaster in predicting fire behavior. The cost of constructing and operating a mobile radiosonde unit would be considerable, butin view ofthe terrific property losses and suppression costs on large fires, such a unit would be justi­ fied. Pilot balloon observations would be impractical because of visibility restrictions, and only very rarely does a large fire occur close enough toan upper air observa­ tional station to make the data rep­ resentative of conditions over the fire. Acknowledgments Our thanks to George M. Byram and Charles C. Buck ofthe U.S. Forest Service andto DeVer Colson ofthe U.S. Weather Bureau for their reviews and comments onthe first draft of this paper. Our thanks also tothe staff ofthe Boise National Forest for their patience in answering questions and supply­ ing data. References Arnold, R.K.; Buck, C.C. 1954. Blow-Up fires—Silviculture or weather problems? Jour. Forestry. 52: 408–411. Byram, G.M. 1954. Atmospheric conditions related to blow-up fires. Sta. Pap. 35. Asheville, NC: USDA Forest Service, Southeastern Forest Experiment Station. Colson, D. 1956. Meteorological problems associated with mass fires. Fire Control Notes. 17: 9–11. ■
CEY TO LOWUP ONDITIONS INTHE S OUTHWEST ?* Robert W. Bates an minimum nighttime tem­ peratures be used in some areas asan indicator ofone type of blowup conditions? Apre­ liminary study of several project fires occurring onthe Tonto, Sitgreaves, and Prescott National Forests inthe years 1951 to 1961 showed that the night before each of these fires blew outof control was unusually warm. Of particular significance isthe fact that most of them occurred following the warmest nights ofthe critical June fire period and often oc­ curred ata peak after several con­ secutive days of rapidly rising temperatures. For some fires which occurred in July and Sep­ tember this also appeared tobe true. Only 4of the13 fires inthe study failed to show this, but even for those 4the temperatures were ator above what is believed tobe the critical point. Tempera-tures onthe nights preceding the start, or blowup, of these fires varied from a high of81°F (27 °C) inthe semidesert to52 °F (11 °C) inthe pine above the Mogollon Rim. These temperatures were all unusually high for the area where the fire occurred. One-Two Combination Why, in June, are some fires con­ trolled at small size while others defy control no matter what the When this article was originally published, Robert Bates wasa district ranger for the USDA Forest Service, Tonto National Forest. A deadly one-two combination ofan unusually warm night followed bya warm day may indicate blowup fire conditions. action taken? Why can you reach some lightning fires while they are still inthe tree, yet others explode into major fires? Why does a quiet or apparently controlled fire sud­ denly actup? A look at relative humidity showed day-to-day fluctu­ ations and seemed notto bean adequate answer to these ques­ tions. This study seems to indicate that a deadly one-two combination ofan unusually warm night fol­ lowed bya warm day may bethe key. If further study should prove this tobe reliable, we could determine more accurately when to increase emergency fire forces and signal the start of intensive fire preven­ tion. Following lightning, extra efforts to ensure early detection could be undertaken. By taking 8:00a.m. readings ofthe previous night’s minimum temperature and plotting them ona graph, it might be possible to spot the beginning of potential blowup conditions. There is usually a very sharp rise from relatively cool nights tohot nights over a period of only 2or 3 days (figs. 1–4). Since this leaves very little time toget ready, the use of nighttime temperatures maybe a better indicator than daytime tem­ peratures because it allows more time to prepare. Too, the charts onthe 13 fires studied actually indicate a better tie-in using minimum rather than maximum temperatures. Fire control organizations are not fully aware of this change in condi­ tions asit isnot indicated in pres­ ent fire-danger meters byany defi­ nite rise inthe index. During June, the Southwest isin extreme condi­ tions already—soit might be said that conditions have suddenly gone from critical to supercritical. Critical Nighttime Temperatures An attempt to expand on this theo­ ryand determine an average date at which this temperature rise occurred proved futile. Itcan apparently happen almost any time in June in this area and may occur as early asMay oras late as July in other southwestern localities. In 1956, the condition seems to have appeared in September onthe Tonto National Forest onthe Buckhorn Fire, coinciding with adry fall period. However, June 10is often mentioned asthe breaking point onthe Tonto. Each forest— possibly each district—would have to chart this separately and watch for the start ofthe temperature rise. From this temperature study, I have arbitrarily said that night­ time temperatures above 45° (7° C) * The article is reprinted from Fire Control Notes 23(4) [Fall 1962]: 95–99.
Figure 1—Roberts and Hatchery Fires, June 1961. Figure 2—Russell Gulch Fire, June 1951. are critical; and with those above 55° (13° C) blowup conditions exist. Cloudy nights keep night­ time temperatures high and may ormay notbe serious depending on whether the clouds disappear by morning. During June, there is probably only a small likelihood of nighttime clouds. Itis recognized that factors other than temperatures also contribute to fire size. Some areas have large fires during periods of high early spring winds; some fires are large because of organizational break­ downs, others because of topogra­ phy; California has its Santa Ana winds; andso on. Undoubtedly, most of these fires would show temperature correlation only through coincidence. Onthe fires studied there wasno attempt to make a complete analysis ofall fac­ tors affecting the particular fire such as topography, wind, relative humidity, human error, time ofday, fuels, and aspect. What was suggested bythe study is that this one common denominator may provide a predictable basis for increased manning anda crash prevention effort during the criti­ cal periods. Assumptions and Recommendations Some assumptions and recommen­ dations that canbe made from this limited study follow. 1. High nighttime temperatures donot of themselves cause fires to blow up, but under these condi­ tions, all other factors which tend to cause large fires are maximized.
2. If nighttime temperatures are rising, going fires must be secured before temperatures rise above the critical point. This is seen inthe case of fires which blow upon the third or fourth day after start. 3. Fires occurring before and after temperature peaks are con­ trolled at small size; some of them under much worse rate-of­ spread conditions. 4. Spotting wasa big factor in most of these fires although winds were not exceptionally strong. This fact was mentioned consistently in discussing these fires with people who had partic­ ipated inthe suppression. Some of these fires became big even though firefighters were on them atthe very start when they were only afew feet across. 5. In June, before the summer lightning period, temperatures canbe used asthe basis for increased prevention effort atall levels. 6. When lightning occurs, detec­ tion forces could be augmented, especially inthe case of long aerial patrol routes where some areas are not covered until 3or 4 hours after daylight. 7. It might be possible to develop new rules for prescribed burn­ ing. Limit burning to times when nighttime temperatures are less than 45 °F (7 °C) andto a time when the temperature trend is down. 8. Inthe June dry period, rapidly rising nighttime temperatures often seem to presage the first lightning storm ofthe season. These high nighttime tempera­ tures usually occur from 24to 48 hours before the lightning storms occur. These first storms are often dry. ■ Figure 3—Boulder and Pranty Fires, June 1959. Figure 4—Buckhorn Fire, September 1961.
AFIRE -W HIRLWIND INA LABAMA * Gordon Powell Onthe afternoon of February 7, 1962, Forest Ranger George Nunnelee andI were making routine equipment inspections in Covington County, AL. At approxi­ mately 2:30p.m., while on higher elevations inthe north endof the county, I commented toMr. Nunnelee that a tall smoke inthe south endof the county had the appearance ofa potential “blowup fire.” “Blowup” seemed highly improbable because ofthe condi­ tion of vegetation following a0.1­ inch (0.25-cm) rain two nights before. My comment was based onthe appearance ofthe smoke which tome indicated adverse wind pat­ terns over a control fire approxi­ mately 21 miles (34km) due north ofus. Singular Smoke Column The column of white smoke (fig. 1) formed an angle of approximately 75 degrees from the ground, rising toward the southwest. At approxi­ mately 5,000 feet (1,500m) it bent to rise straight upto approximately 9,000 feet (2,700m). At that alti­ tude the smoke column reached a stratum of haze and scattered flat­ tened clouds. Like the smoke columns from other control fires in this vicinity (fig. 1), the column ascended tothe stratum and flattened outin all directions. Smoke from the differ­ ent columns then drifted inthe When this article was originally published, Gordon Powell wasa management forester for the Alabama Division of Forestry. * The article is reprinted from Fire Control Notes 24(1) [Winter 1949]: 20–24. This smoke column was different from the others in that it bent upwards and had a “mushroom” of vapor that penetrated the stratum “barrier.” haze layer toward the southeast. Nevertheless, this column was dif­ ferent from the other visible columns in that itwas the only one that bent upwards and had a “mushroom” of vapor beginning to form immediately over the smoke column that penetrated the stra­ tum “barrier.” Aswe neared the control fire the billowing smoke indicated that itwas very hot. Approximately 2 hours elapsed between the time we first noticed the smoke until we arrived inthe vicinity. The fire had been set along a north–south road to back eastward into the wind through some heavy logging slash and grassy vegetation. An east–west road was the boundary onthe north; firelines were maintained onthe east and south. The fire had burned about 500 yards (450m) from the north–south road. Ribbon of Smoke At approximately 4:50p.m. we passed by about one mile (1.6km) north ofthe fire and observed that the eastern part ofthe burn was the hottest. Driving southwest to approximately one-half mile (0.8km) west ofthe fire we noticed something unusual about the west­ ern part in that there wasa smooth appearing ribbon of smoke, steady and lighter in color than the surrounding smoke. This “ribbon” of smoke ran from the Figure 1—Smoke columns over control fires as seen from a distance of21 miles (34km] tothe north. Column Bis the smoke with which we came in direct contact. Columns Aand Care from fires several miles from B.
A smooth ribbon of smoke, ash was blown into itas the funnel moved off.) As this center 15to 20 steady and lighter in color, inches passed over a smoking limb ran from the ground tothe “vapor cloud” orlog, it caused a sudden vigorous over the smoke column. spewing of flame in4 directions, ground tothe “vapor cloud” over the smoke column. We felt that better judgment would tell us that this wasa light refraction from the sun, yetit closely resembled ator­ nado funnel asit stood motionless amid the boiling smoke around it (fig. 2). Feeling as foolish as boys trying to find the end ofthe rain­ bow, we drove toward the ribbon of smoke. The “hot part” ofthe smoke col­ umn was rising from the burning fuel with the wind toa point over the edge ofthe old burn andat that point rising straight upto the vapor mushroom and flattening out under the vapor ina very flat layer. Starting atthe vapor mush­ room there wasa funnel of Figure 2—Appearance of funnel as seen from the west. whirling smoke, small in diameter, reaching downward through the column of smoke, but not bending quite so abruptly asthe other smoke, so that the base ofthe fun­ nel was outside the fire andin the old burn near the east–west road onthe north edge ofthe burn. Itwas there that we found it. From any distance the funnel was whiter than the other smoke, but close observation revealed particles of burned litter whirling vigorously inthe funnel. Some of these parti­ cles were released at higher eleva­ tions so that many burned particles were floating down from the smoke and settling over a wide area. The funnel was only about 6to 10 feet (1.8–3m) in diameter andap­ peared tobe the same diameter atthe topas atthe base. The smoke inthe old burn slowly drifted counter-clockwise around the fun­ nel which was also whirling count­ er-clockwise. Funnel Behavior A close look atthe funnel showed that itwas not stationary asit first appeared, because the base wan­ dered slowly around inan area about 50 feet (15m) in diameter inside the old burn. Asthe funnel wandered slowly around, wefol­ lowed closely on foot, studying its actions. While the base moved through the burn, it “sucked up” all the ashin the center 15to 20 inches (38–51cm), exposing mineral soil. (However, it left no mineral soil exposed inthe path because more with each armof flame resembling that from a blowtorch, and the 4 arms forming a cross quartering a circle by right angles of flames. I stepped into the funnel andit proved tobe quite intensive in wind velocity. In fact, it filled my clothes with particles ofash and made my ears “pop.” At about 5:20p.m. there wasa sud­ den rush of cool wind from the south, then from the northeast, and then from the west; and the funnel was gone. Then a steady, gentle breeze caused the smoke inthe old burn to drift northward at first and then to drift back into the column of billowing smoke still rising as before from the burning tops of slash. About 30 minutes elapsed between the time we first saw the whirlwind and the time that it disappeared. The map in figure 3 shows the general path ofthe funnel base and its position with respect tothe fire. Unusual Firewhirl While watching this whirlwind, I realized itwas not the usual “firedevil” or “dustdevil” type often seen inor near forest fires; never­ theless, Ihad no idea that others had seen and reported similar whirlwinds. However, having read other accounts (Graham 1952, 1957), this whirlwind seemed dif­ ferent in that acreage ofthe associ­ ated fire was small, the terrain is relatively flat, and the base ofthe funnel wasin a cool part ofthe old burn. Passage over “hot spots” seemed purely accidental. It also
Asthe center ofthe funnel was70 percent, and the wind was from the northwest at28 miles per passed over a smoking limb orlog, hour (45km/h). For what itmay it caused a sudden vigorous spewing be worth, weather maps show that of flame in four directions. onthe morning before the fire, Figure 3—Mapof the fire area. appeared tobe ofa different type from the small firewhirls produced ona model scale (Byram and Martin 1962). Worth mentioning is that had this firewhirl wandered into the flame it probably would have drawn up flame and burning particles rather than burned particles. Also, it might have increased considerably in violence. Explaining its triggering and cause would be strictly a guess with me. Perhaps the intense heat of burn­ ing logging slash, perhaps the adverse wind patterns, or perhaps the cumulus cloud cap might bethe key. Environmental Factors The weather, too, seems worthy of mention in association with the occurrence ofthe fire-whirlwind. According to information gathered from a nearby fire danger rating station and information furnished bythe Southern Forest Fire Laboratory, there are several inter­ esting area weather features. At ground level the relative humid­ ity was 22 percent, and the wind was from the east and northeast at4 miles per hour (6.4km/h). At5,000 feet (1,500m) the relative humidity was55 percent, and the wind was variable upto 10 miles per hour (16km/h). At10,000 feet (3,000m) the relative humidity there wasa 100-mile-per-hour (160-km/h) jet stream over the area at35,000 feet (10,700m). Onthe 8–100 meter type fire dan­ ger rating station at nearby Lawrence Tower site, the buildup index was recorded as34, the high­ est fuel moisture percent was6.5, and the burning index was12 in Fire Class 3. More Information Needed Fire-whirlwinds have frequently been observed inall parts ofthe country where fires occur, and appear to have important effects on forest fires. Itis likely that these funnels have often been observed but not reported in Alabama; or perhaps weare too busy fighting fire tosee the whirls that are pres­ ent. There is hardly enough infor­ mation available to fully substanti­ ate the theories ofthe cause of fire whirlwinds, yet such knowledge might answer many questions con­ cerning unusual fire behavior that unexpectedly becomes peculiarly hazardous tomen and equipment. I join other observers in hoping that more detailed observations will be reported. References Byram, G.M.; Martin, R.E. 1962. Fire- whirlwinds inthe laboratory. Fire Control Notes. 23(1): 13–17. Graham, H.E. 1952. A fire-whirlwind of tornadic violence. Fire Control Notes. 13(2): 22–24. Graham, H.E. 1957. Fire-whirlwind forma­ tion as favored by topography and upper winds. Fire Control Notes. 18(1): 20–24. ■
THE F OREST F IRES OFA PRIL 1963 INN EWJ ERSEY P OINT THEW AYTO B ETTER P ROTECTION ANDM ANAGEMENT * Wayne G. Banks and Silas Little Inthe spring of 1963, conditions conducive to severe forest fires prevailed rather generally throughout the Northeastern States. Scant rainfall, low humidi­ ty, and high winds combined to produce high and extreme fire-dan­ ger ratings for prolonged periods. On April 20 fire danger reached a peak in several areas. Asa result, fast-moving fires of unusual inten­ sity burned outof control. The New England States were for­ tunate in escaping really large fires; the largest was approximately 700 acres (283ha) in northern Maine. However, New England did have many small fires. Massachu­ setts, for example, had4,861 forest fires in April, a record for that State and possibly for any State. Fire disasters made the headlines of many newspapers. InNew Jersey, newspapers reported more than 200,000 acres (80,000ha) burned and 458 buildings destroyed (fig. 1). These reports listed 7 persons dead, many injured, and2,500 evacuated—of whom 1,000 were left homeless. New York newspa­ pers reported that a brush fire on Staten Island covered 10 square miles (25.9km2) and destroyed 100 homes. Inthe suburbs of Philadelphia, and elsewhere in When this article was originally published, Wayne Banks and Silas Little were research foresters for the Northeastern Forest Experiment Station, Newtown Square, PA. * The article is reprinted from Fire Control Notes 25(3) [Summer 1964]: 3–6. Inthe spring of 1963, record low rainfall and humidity and high winds laid the foundation fora blistering fire season inNew Jersey. Pennsylvania, homes were threat­ ened by numerous woods fires. Fast-moving fires were reported in Maryland. West Virginia, Virginia, and Kentucky were also hard pressed to control their many fires. Whether these newspaper state­ ments were correct inall details is probably not very important. But what should be important to foresters and the general public are the reasons for these disasters, the ways of preventing them, and the probability of similar conditions occurring again. The second seems particularly important because on April 20, when most ofthe damage occurred in southern New Jersey, fire suppression techniques and pre-suppression measures proved woefully inadequate. Weather Conditions April 1963 was the driest April on record inNew Jersey. Only 0.31 inches (0.79cm) of rain fell during the first 29 days ofthe month, and0.52 inches (1.32cm) onthe 30th. Figure 1—New Jersey home and vehicle destroyed bythe April 1963 fires.
On22 days, maximum wind veloci­ ties at Trenton were 20to 40 miles per hour (32–64km/h). Inthe 30 days prior to April 20, precipitation deficiency amounted to3 inches (7.6cm). Foresters and the general public should ask why the fires occurred, how can they be prevented, and what isthe likelihood of similar weather conditions occurring inthe future. Relative humidity on that day dropped from 50 percent at6 a.m. to23 percent at10 a.m. and remained between 20and 23per­ cent until nearly 5p.m. Temper­ ature was80 °F (27 °C) at midday, dropping to53 °F (12 °C) atmid­ night. Fuel moisture indicator sticks attwo fire-danger stations showed 3.5and 4.1 percent fuel moisture at2 p.m. At both stations the buildup index was 100 and the burning index was 200 onthe 8–0 meter. The estimated average wind veloci­ tyfor April 20was 20 miles per hour (32km). The average ofthe maximum wind velocities reported from the three nearest Weather Bureau offices was33 miles per hour (53km), and gusts were prob­ ably as high as50 miles per hour (80km). Turbulence prevailed atlow levels, and many small whirl­ winds developed. Prevailing wind direction veered during the day from northwest to west, then back to northwest, andto almost north late at night. Comparable Conditions inthe Past Because April was such a black day for fire protection inNew Jersey andin sections of neighboring states, we attempted to determine the past frequency of such weather conditions. Weather Bureau records for the previous 49 years indicated that the spring fire weather was never quite sobad asin 1963. During that half century only four spring days had condi­ tions that approached those of April 20, 1963. In early May 1930, when fires were rampant in South Jersey, surface burning conditions ontwo days approached those of April 20. The chief difference was that, inthe 30 days preceding April 20, 1963, there had been an inch (2.5cm) less precipitation than inthe 30 days preceding May2 and4, 1930. However, previous seasons have had conditions comparable to April 20in both wind velocity and drought. Since 1913 there have been six fall days of apparently similar conditions, and one sum­ mer day and four fall days when conditions approached those of April 20. However, because of less wind within stands in summer and early fall, the shorter days of fall, and less fresh leaf litter, we doubt that anyof these days actually pro­ vided burning conditions as critical ason April 20, 1963. On several other days of that April there were high winds. Fuel mois­ ture was low, andat one danger station the buildup index regis­ tered 100on 10 days. Butat no time did all the elements of fire danger combine to create condi­ tions so severe as those on April 20, although April 29was fairly close. Fire Behavior Because ofthe drought, low humidity, and high winds, some ofthe fires of April 1963 started and spread in fuels so light that nor­ mally they are considered insuffi­ cient to maintain a fire. Owing to intensity, rapid spread, and ability to carry across very light fuels, suburban fires were difficult to suppress, and many buildings were lost. Inthe heavier and more flamma­ ble fuels ofthe New Jersey Pine Region, the wind-driven fires burned with great intensity and caused severe damage to both oaks and hard pines. Fires spread rapid­ ly across upland sites where there was relatively little fuel, ason areas where prescribed burning had been done 1or 2 years earlier. On such sites a very light cover of pine needles was sufficient to maintain a fire. Oak leaves, where present, were blown across bare spots so that fires advanced rapidly even in scattered fuels. Because fuels contained so little moisture and winds were so strong, the rate of spread of fires on April 20was extreme almost regardless of fuel type. Oneof the larger fires, which started just north ofthe Lebanon State Forest, advanced about 3-1/2 miles (5.6km) in2 hours and9 miles (14.5km) in6 hours. Probably the rate of spread on April 20, 1963, has been matched or even exceeded by other fires for short periods. However, foresters and wardens with many years’ experience in fighting South Jersey fires could recall no case where the sustained rate wasas high ason April 20. The Forest Fire Service ofthe New
This whirlwind seemed different in that acreage ofthe associated fire was small, the terrain is relatively flat, and the base ofthe funnel wasin a cool part ofthe old burn. Jersey Department of Conservation and Economic Development pro­ vided data from 1924–63 that showed only 1930 tobe compara­ bleto April 1963 in number of large fires and their rate of spread. The two fires with the greatest area burned per hour were in 1963 and covered about twice as much ground per hour asany ofthe much publicized 1930 fires for which complete data are available. The data also emphasize the importance of April and May in local protection problems. Suppression Difficulties The New Jersey Forest Fire Service uses a combination of suppression techniques and several kinds of machines. The latter include trucks of various sizes upto 500­ gallon (1,893-L) tank trucks equipped with 4-wheel drive; air­ craft equipped to drop 150to 200 gallons (568–757L) of retardant; and tractor and plow units. Back­ firing and handtools are also used, and backfiring plays a large part in stopping head fires and tying in flank fires. On April 20 none ofthe suppres­ sion methods proved effective. For example, only oneof the three pilots employed for firefighting was willing tofly, considering the40-mile-per-hour (64-km/h) winds and the low-level turbulence. Effectiveness of tractor and plow units on April 20was confined to areas with no more than 1 year’s accumulation of litter, and that mostly pine needles. Tank trucks and handtools were useful incon­ trolling spot fires in1-year needle litter, butin oak leaf litter neither was enough. For example, at about 1:45p.m. between New Lisbon and Route 70, a spot fire started along a road within 50 feet (15m) ofa tank truck, its crew, and several men with handtools. At that particular moment, a small whirlwind spread this fire for 100 to200 feet (30–60m). High winds forced the aban­ donment of suppression attempts, even though the area had only a year’s litter since the last pre­ scribed burn. The extremely dry and windy con­ ditions caused much difficulty in backfiring. Attempts to backfire and hold the line along sand, grav­ el, and even blacktop roads hadto be done slowly and carefully topre­ vent the backfires from jumping the road. Backfires along a State highway crossed the road even though the cleared strip in that area ranged from 75to 120 feet (23–37m) wide. In some places head fires arrived before backfiring could be completed. Effectiveness of Prescribed Burns Prescribed burning inthe winter to facilitate suppression of fires inthe South Jersey Pine Region has long been advocated. However, this measure too proved less effective on April 20, 1963, than in previous wildfires. In general, prescribed burning 1or more years before the wildfires of April 20did not facilitate suppres­ sion appreciably, especially where oak litter wasan important compo­ nent ofthe fuel complex. In these areas the 1963 fires were not stopped under fuel conditions that had permitted the suppression of earlier wildfires. More recent burns that left some surface fuel remain­ ing only reduced the damage, and others that removed nearly all the fuel did not stop the fire. Onone firebreak where the 1962–63win­ ter burn had consumed only the top litter, the fire burned with suf­ ficient intensity to kill many ofthe oaks and severely scorch the crowns ofthe pines (fig. 2). Rapid combustion of wind-tossed dry fuels inthe April 20 fires creat­ ed extreme temperatures and greater damage on prescribed burn areas than in other years. On areas with 1 year’s accumulation of litter after periodic burns, head fires killed most ofthe oaks but not the overstory pines. Strong flank fires on such areas killed about half ofthe overstory oaks. Damage to oaks in areas with 2or more years’ accumulation of litter was usually about as severe asin stands with no previous prescribed burning. However, any reduction of fuel was apparently effective in reducing damage to pines. Preventing Similar Disasters Prevention. Oneof the major fires of April 20–21 reportedly started where a debris burner hada permit for night burning. The fire held over ina brush pile and broke outon April 20. Atthe nearest fire- danger station the buildup index had reached 59on April 19, climbed steadily to100 onthe
Figure 2—The stands on both sides of this road had been prescribe-burned inthe winter of 1962–63. A good burn had been obtained onthe left side, and here the fire of April 20, 1963, burned only afew scattered patches. Onthe right side, only the top litter had been burned bythe winter fire, and much damage was done in April. 17th, dropped to97 onthe 18th, but was back at100 on April 19th. We suggest that no burning per­ mits, for either dayor night, be issued when the buildup index is60 or more according tothe system nowin usein the Northeast. Any permits issued when the buildup index is less than 60 should beso limited in time that they will expire before the index reaches 60. Camping should be prohibited at remote sites when the buildup index reaches 60, andat all areas when the index is80 or more. Prohibiting camping may meet resistance; yet such a measure is needed as much for the safety ofthe campers asfor fire prevention. On April 20, 1963, a large group ofBoy Scouts were camped inthe Lebanon State Forest, where only a slight shift in wind direction would have brought a head fire, quite possibly before they could have been evacuated. Another important prevention activity is reduction of fuel through prescribed burning dur­ ing the winter in types where these burns are silviculturally desirable. Earlier recommenda­ tions for the South Jersey Pine Region appear to remain sound:
1. For maximum protection of improved property, burns at1­ or2-year intervals be used. 2. For extensive forested proper­ ties, barrier zones be prepared bythe prescribed burning of belts of upland sites, which would reinforce swamps or other natural firebreaks. 3. Eventual development ofa checkerboard pattern on upland sites inthe larger unimproved holdings, i.e., a pattern of young unburned stands andof older, periodically burned stands. Prescribed burns at4- or5-year intervals are considered essential ina protection program. In years like 1963, only recently burned areas will be effective bar­ riers against fire. Butin view ofthe rarity of such extreme fire danger, an annual and more costly fuel reduction seems justified only near buildings or other improved prop­ erty. Management for pine over oak, besides favoring the production of timber, can facilitate fire control under certain conditions. Periodic prescribed burning in areas with few oaks results in less rapid com­ bustion ofthe rather compact nee­ dle litter. In April 1963 the burning needles were not carried long dis­ tances bythe wind asoak leaves were. Suppression was therefore easier in stands that had few oaks. Presuppression. What canbe done in presuppression to help ensure initial-attack success under fire conditions such ashad developed in April 1963? We suggest broaden­ ing the scope ofthe working agree­ ments between the New Jersey Forest Fire Service and other State agencies, companies, and individu­ alsto furnish equipment when itis needed. Needed equipment from outside sources should beon standby whenever the fuel and weather conditions indicate acon­ flagration threat. Protection agencies might also consider providing tanks of500­ gallon (1,893-L) capacity or larger and equipped with their own pumping units. These tanks could be strategically located, and stored in such away that they could be mounted on flat-bedor dump trucks and put into operation quickly. The responsibilities of most forest fire protection agencies today extend to much more than protect­ ing woodlands alone. The extension of residential building and industry into rural wooded areas, the rever­ sion of farmland to forest, and the development of forest recreational areas are now making high-value improvements and even lives dependent onthe efficiency offor­ est fire suppression. Public recog­ nition of these increasing responsi­ bilities must be encouraged ifpro­ tection agencies areto receive the financial support that they need. Suppression. What canbe done to control fires under conditions such as prevailed inNew Jersey and other parts ofthe Coastal Plain in April 1963? When the high winds eliminated the small airplane asa working tool, suppression forces found themselves back to conven­ tional weapons—tanker trucks, plows, and hand crews—which were inadequate. Perhaps larger aircraft, carrying heavier loads and effective under windier conditions, and larger tanker trucks with mul­ tiple pumping units might be feasi­ ble. Although the latter might notbe adequate for such fires as occurred in April 1963, they should prove effective against many fires that cannot nowbe attacked direct­ ly. They could also bea valuable aidto backfiring. Also the use and coordination of equipment could be improved. Much difficulty was experienced in holding backfires, even along wide cleared rights ofway. Could tanker units ofthe type available, support­ edby large tank trucks for refilling them, adequately fireproof the fuels onthe opposite side ofthe roadway to permit rapid and safe backfiring from such roadway? This type of operation might require planning and practice. It might very well resemble the “one-lick” method used by hand crews, with several tankers proceeding in tandem ata reasonably good speed, each one spraying a designated portion ofthe fuels. Studies to determine the feasibility of this approach should be initiated. ■
THE H ARROGATE FIRE —M ARCH 15, 1964* B.J. Graham The Harrogate Fire started at about 2:30p.m. in Section 1938, Hundred Kanmantoo, onMr. Brice’s property (fig. 1). The fire traveled mostly east through valuable grazing land and burned approximately 1,600 acres (650ha). The exact cause ofthe fire isnot known, but after investigations itis thought to have started from a spark from the exhaust ofa chain saw. Most ofthe area consisted largely of annual grassland; there wasa scattering of Eucalypt trees. The winter and spring preceding the summer of 1964 were very wet, and the summer was mild. Therefore, pasture fuels in this area were abundant and completely cured. The temperature reached 92ºF (33ºC) inthe afternoon of March 15, 1964, with a light wind blowing west to northwest. The winds were consistent; the approxi­ mate mean velocity was10 miles per hour (16km/h). Fire Behavior Commencing at Section 1938, Hundred Kanmantoo, the fire swept generally east at2.5 miles per hour (4km/h). The rate of spread ofthe head fire was affected by such topographical features as creeks and ridges. These features and the country’s rocky nature restricted access. Where possible, When this article was originally published, B.J. Graham wasa bushfire protection advisor in Australia. * The article is reprinted from Fire Control Notes 27(1) [Winter 1966]: 7, 15. Itwas originally adapted from the South Australian Emergency Fire Services Manual, 1964. Where possible, the flanks were worked by fire crews, and the head fire was confined largely toa front of90 chains. the flanks were worked by fire crews, and the head fire was con­ fined largely toa front of90 chains (5,940 feet [1,811m]). By3:05p.m. the fire had spread for approximately 70 chains (3,960 feet [1,408m]) east. By3:12p.m. ithad spread for another 60 chains (3,960 feet [1,207m]), but the flanks were being controlled and the head fire continued east. At3:20p.m. a pincer movement by units working on both flanks was becoming effective, and the head fire, still moving east, was nar­ rowed toa 70-chain (3,960-foot [1,408-m]) front. The fire had then traveled approximately 2 miles (3.2km). At about this time the Brukunga Unit was destroyed, and one man (the driver) was badly burned. The farm buildings at White Hut, which were inthe fire’s path, were saved. At3:30p.m. the head fire hit the Nairne–Harrogate road. It jumped over, butit was controlled after burning 50 acres (20ha). The rest ofthe front was controlled along the road, and the fire was consid­ ered under control. The time was3:50p.m. The fire units then attacked the southern boundary and quickly obtained control. Several miles of fencing were dam­ aged, and approximately 1 mile (1.6km) ofit must be replaced. Some fences of sawn hardwood and iron droppers withstood the fire, but the wire components will last fora much shorter period because ofthe deterioration ofthe galvaniz­ ing content. Effective Suppression The organization and method of attack employed by fire controllers was extremely efficient and result­ edin the saving of large areas of heavily grassed land. Seventeen Emergency Fire Service units, capably supported by private units, attacked the fire onthe first day, anda lesser number of conducted patrolling and mopping-up opera­ tions on March 16. The confining of this fire to approximately 1,600 acres (650ha) is even more praiseworthy when one considers the rocky nature of this inaccessible country and the fact that except for the Nairne– Harrogate road no natural or artifi­ cial barrier was near the fire. ■
Figure 1—Map showing progress ofthe Harrogate Fire. Websites on Fire* * Occasionally, Fire Management Today briefly describes Websites brought toour attention bythe wildland fire community. Readers should not construe the description of these sites asin any way exhaustive oras an official endorsement bythe USDA Forest Service. To have a Website described, contact the managing editor, Hutch Brown, at USDA Forest Service, Office of Communication, Mail Stop 1111, 1400 Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-1111, 202-205-1028 (tel.), 202-205-0885 (fax), hutchbrown@fs.fed.us (e-mail). Wildfire Mitigation Programs This national database isa clearinghouse for infor­ mation on State and local programs for mitigating the risk of wildland fire on private lands. Users can get information on more than 129 nonfederal poli­ cies and programs. Information about regulatory programs, educational efforts, homeowner assis­ tance, and community recognition events is easy to find by searching a State or program index orby using the advanced keyword option. Developed by Louisiana State University and the USDA Forest Service’s Southern Research Station, the site uses sources ranging from statutes and agency regula­ tions to State, county, and local fire personnel. “Featured programs” have included the Colorado State Forest Service’s Wildfire Hazard Mitigation Program, Texas Urban Wildland Interface Exhibits, and Kittitas County Junior Firewise Educational Program. Found at <http:www.wildfireprograms.com>
THE FIRE B EHAVIOR TEAM INA CTION : THE C OYOTE FIRE , 1964* John D. Dell Ona large wildfire, the fire boss bases much ofhis strategy on Santa Ana winds, surfacing at night, had swept information provided byhis an almost-controlled brush fire across firelines staff and other assistants. In 1964, into heavily populated residential areas. fire behavior teams furnished advice at several forest fires in southern California. Each team, directed bya fire behavior officer, gathered and analyzed vital infor­ mation on weather, fuels, and topography. The team concept (see the sidebar), originally described by Countryman and Chandler (1963), proved an effective method for evaluating the behavior of fast- moving fires. This article briefly describes howa fire behavior team operated onthe 67,000-acre (27,000-ha) Coyote Fire that burned onthe Los Padres National Forest in September 1964. Coyote Fire At11 p.m. on September 22, 1964, a fire behavior team was dispatched from the Riverside Forest Fire Laboratory tothe Coyote Fire atthe request ofthe Los Padres National Forest. Santa Ana winds, surfacing at night, had swept an almost-controlled brush fire across firelines into heavily populated res­ idential areas. By early morning, the fire, then outof control, had burned more than 600 acres (240ha). Oneof the most devastating conflagrations in recent local his- When this article was originally published, John Dell wasa fire research technician for the USDA Forest Service, Pacific Southwest Forest and Range Experiment Station, Berkeley, CA. * The article is reprinted from Fire Control Notes 27(1) [Winter 1966]: 8–10, 15. tory was imminent. However, dur­ ing the day shift the fire ceased to threaten the residential areas asthe Santa Ana winds returned aloft. The sea breeze and upslope wind caused the fire to spread into the mountains. Atthe Coyote Fire camp, the fire behavior officer was briefed bythe U.S. Weather Bureau’s fire weather forecaster on existing and antici­ pated weather. The fire behavior officer made a behavior forecast ready for the plans chief before each shift so fireline overhead could be thoroughly briefed. Also, any sudden deviations were explained immediately tothe fire boss, anda revised forecast was made. Team members, meanwhile, began taking pilot balloon observations of winds aloft, making ground obser­ vations, studying preattack maps, and talking with fireline overhead in order to better understand fire Role ofthe Fire Behavior Team Team observations and the fire behavior officer’s interpretation com­ bined with reports of scouts and line overhead are extensively used in fire control planning. An important function ofthe fire behavior team is fire weather observation. By working closely with theU.S. Weather Bureau’s fire weather forecaster, the team saves much time and avoids dupli­ cation of effort. Information pro­ vided bythe fire weather forecast­ er includes maps ofthe latest syn­ optic weather transmitted byfax from the Weather Bureau. Team members may also make upper air soundings of humidity and temperature or measure the winds aloft. Fire behavior team takes a pilot balloon observation with theodolite to determine patterns of local winds aloft. Photo: USDA Forest Service.
conditions. Equipped with its own transportation, radio net, and instruments, the team was able to disperse to various locations onthe fire. A communications net linked the team with the fire behavior officer, and pertinent information was sent regularly. Ground obser­ vations were made of temperature, humidity, windspeed, and wind direction; type, density, and condi­ tion of fuels inthe path ofthe fire; topography and aspect; current fire behavior; and trouble areas. The fire behavior team made a thor­ ough surveillance ofthe area above andto the flanks ofthe main front. It noted that strong northeasterly winds were still aloft, although the layer had been rising since morn­ ing. The odds were against these winds surfacing as they had the night before, but the forecast indi­ cated this might happen. Wider Fire Front Early onthe evening of September 23, a team member was sent tothe ridgetop above the fire to observe its behavior andto look for any signs of unusual changes. At7 p.m., he noted that the humidity had dropped to14 percent. Light and variable winds gradually devel­ oped into a strong northeasterly blast that gusted upto 35 miles per hour (56km/h). The fire began to intensify onthe upper slopes. These factors indicated the fire would probably resume the same pattern ason the previous night— buton a wider front. The fire behavior team immediately report­ ed these observations tothe fire behavior officer at fire camp. He, in turn, notified the fire boss so crews onthe line would be warned. By7:40p.m., these winds were felt in Santa Barbara. The fire behavior officer made a behavior forecast ready for the plans chief before each shift so fire- line overhead could be thoroughly briefed. These winds continued most ofthe night. At2 a.m. (September 24), temperatures as high as92 ºF (33ºC) and humidities aslow as10 percent were reported atthe Weather Bureau’s fire weather mobile unit atthe fire camp. Fire again swept through residential areas inthe foothills. By morning the fire had burned along the entire Santa Barbara front, over the ridge, and down into the Santa Ynez River drain­ age. Personnel were added tothe fire behavior team to increase cov­ erage ofthe growing conflagration. The fire behavior officer and part ofthe team were requested to observe and advise ona critical backfiring operation onthe west side ofthe fire. Another team member made an upper air sound­ ingby helicopter, in order to deter­ mine moisture inthe lower atmos­ phere and atmospheric stability over the fire. Inthe fire behavior forecast for September 24, prepared early that morning, itwas predicted that strong Santa Ana conditions would continue at high levels, but would weaken atlow levels during the day. Itwas reported that fuels were very dry and hot runs could be expected where favored by wind or topography. Atmospheric instabili­ ty would favor the development of large convection columns, spot­ ting, and firewhirls. Santa Ana winds were again likely to surface. Fire Size Doubled During the next few shifts the Coyote Fire nearly doubled in size. More than 3,000 firefighters from all parts ofthe Western United States joined inthe battle. Zone fire camps were setup at several points around the fire in order to place the manpower where it could be shifted most efficiently. This, ofThe huge Coyote Fire near Santa Barbara, CA (September 22to October 1, 1964), required the use of three fire behavior teams. The fire burned more than 67,000 acres (27,000ha) of brush-covered watershed. Photo: USDA Forest Service.
course, created a difficult commu­ nications problem for the fire behavior team. Sending fire behav­ ior forecasts toall these zone camps over already overloaded communications systems was diffi­ cult, yet very essential. Every effort was made to bridge the communi­ cations gap and to relay forecasts toall camps, since many ofthe line personnel from distant forests were unfamiliar with some ofthe condi­ tions that affect the behavior of southern California fires. Another fire behavior team flew from the Northern Forest Fire Laboratory at Missoula, MT. Two more radio-equipped vehicles and extra backpack radios were brought in from Riverside. The fire behavior officer reorganized and divided his enlarged team and located the shifts at four points around the fire (fig. 1; also see the sidebar). About 270 ground weather obser­ vations, 40 pilot balloon observa­ tions, and7 upper air soundings were taken during the6-day period the fire behavior teams were assigned tothe Coyote Fire. From helicopter, truck, jeep, andby walking the fireline, team members observed and reported conditions onthe fire almost continually. Effective Team Approach The Coyote Fire provided a good example ofthe effectiveness ofthe team approach in fire behavior Figure 1—Asthe fire spread north, the fire behavior officer divided and relocated his team for better coverage. Photo: USDA Forest Service.
coverage of conflagrations. With information flowing in from vari­ ous locations, the fire behavior officer has more time to appraise the situation, consult with the weather forecaster, and furnish a more complete and accurate fire behavior forecast. With team members in constant communica­ tion, hecan be alerted to areas requiring his special attention. The fire weather forecaster, sup­ plied with frequent weather obser­ vations taken bythe team, benefits by having more detailed local information on which to base his forecasts. The fire behavior team, as employed in southern California during 1964, is certainly not the final answer to fire control prob­ lems. Itis, however, the best approach yet developed for keep­ ing abreast ofthe behavior ofa forest fire. Equipped with the instruments, tools, and trained personnel todo the job, fire behavior teams offer a service that—if properly used—can contribute to more effective fire control operations. Reference Countryman, C.M.; Chandler, C.C. 1963. The fire behavior team approach in fire control. Fire Control Notes. 24(3): 56–60. ■ Onthe 67,000-acre (27,000-ha) Coyote Fire, the fire behavior team worked from various locations to improve the information flow (fig. 1). Potrero Seco Camp. The fire behavior officer and fire weather fore­ caster were headquartered here with the mobile weather unit. Team 1was assigned to take pilot balloon observations and upper air sound­ ings, andto make ground observations and reconnaissance ahead ofthe fire. Los Prietos Camp. Team 2was assigned ground observations and reconnaissance onthe west and northwest sides ofthe fire. Pendola Camp. Team 3was assigned ground observations, pilot bal­ loon observations, and reconnaissance inthe upper drainage ofthe Santa Ynez River. Polo Camp. One meteorologist was stationed here to take helicopter upper air soundings, ground observations, and reconnaissance onthe south side ofthe fire. Relay. Here a pickup truck equipped with radio relayed fire behavior observations from the roving teams tothe fire behavior officer. The relay system, though makeshift, provided fairly good coverage ofthe fire, supplied more information on which to base forecasts, and made it easier for the teams to circulate forecasts tothe various camps.
“G LEASON C OMPLEX ” PUTS UPH UGE “P LUME ”: AT RIBUTE TOP AULG LEASON Paul Keller OnMay 3, 2003, a unique “wild­ fire” occurred above the spec­ tacular rock walls overlooking the Crooked River in fire-prone central Oregon. Although this inci­ dent never appeared ina situation report, inthe hearts ofthe wild- land fire community, itput up quite a plume. Almost 100 men and women—no strangers to fire shovels and pulaskis—passed through the crew check-in area on that morning. Mostly “individual resources,” they hailed from all over the Pacific Northwest, California, Idaho, Montana, Colorado—even asfar away as Michigan, Massachusetts, and Maine. All for a single-day fire event, a different kind of planned ignition. Gleason’s Family of Fire Their volunteer dispatch orders for this unforgettable day had been delivered afew weeks in advance. When they got the word—despite all extenuating personal circum­ stances—they came. They included nurse practitioners, laborers, artists, city planners, teachers, ranchers, business owners, anda gamut of folks working for the USDA Forest Service and other agencies involved in wildland fire management. Paul Keller served under Paul Gleason asa squad boss onthe Zigzag Hotshot Crew from 1985 to 1989. Heis nowa contract writer/editor for the USDA Forest Service’s Fire and Aviation Management Staff, Washington Office, Washington, DC. From wherever they came, they were all from the same original clan: brothers and sisters inthe family of fire—more specifically, Paul Gleason’s family of fire. That’swhy they had come from sofar andso wide tothe memorial “Gleason Complex.” Yes, the heat from this “fire” was the compassion fora fallen com­ rade. The torching was from the bonding of pure emotions. The flareups were the outbursts of appreciation and gratitude, coupled with the pangs ofso many bitter­ sweet memories. All for Paul Gleason. Paul Gleason watching over his crew during a prescribed fire. Photo: Tom Iraci, USDA Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Region, Portland, OR, 1988. What would you want your legacy tobe? Paul Gleason: I suppose I would want my legacy tobe that firefighters begin to realize the impor­ tance of being a student of fire and that Iwas able to make that happen.* Hotshotting Shaped His Core Any member ofthe national wild- land fire community—from ground-pounder to fire behavior analyst andon upthe food chain ofthe Incident Command System— who hasn’t heard of Paul Gleason has obviously been ina deep Rip Van Winkle coma. Gleason’s wildland fire career spanned almost 40 years—from his teenage days as lead brush hook on southern California’s Dalton Hotshots inthe early 1960s, tohis time asan adjunct professor for wildland fire science at Colorado State University, until the cancer burning within him bumped him from us forever in February 2003. What are the biggest improvements you have witnessed inthe wild- land fire service? Paul Gleason: I think that would have tobe the increased focus on firefighter safety. * From an interview with Paul Gleason in February 2003. For the full interview, seep. 91.
A Celebration of Paul’s life & The Fire Community ofthe Northwest Please join the Zigzag Hotshots (1976-2003) fora celebration of Paul’s life and all ofour connections inthe fire community ofthe Northwest… Date: Saturday, May3, 2003 Location: Roby’s Farm at Smith Rock, Oregon (5 miles north of Redmond, 3 miles east of Highway 97at 9990 NE Smith Rock Loop, Terrebonne) 1300 Crew Check-In Drop off your gear, setup your tent, add your photos tothe PLANS BOARD! 1500 Briefing atthe “Barn” (A5-minute walk from Roby’s Farm. If driving, instead of turning right togo to Roby’s Farm, continue past the gravel road 1/4 mile tothe last house/barn onthe left…signs will bein place) Slide show byTom Iraci Guest Speakers Open Mike… share a story about Paul Ifyou would like to speak or have slides to contribute, please coordinate w/Dennis Ghelfi at dghelfi@fs.fed.usor call (503) 622-3191 Ext 638 1700 Dinner please RSVP BY APRIL 20to Jeff@Lwarren.comor call (503) 622-3444 Burgers, Dogs, Garden Burgers provided (contributions accepted!) Bring a side dish to share Bring your own Beverages and lawn chairs (coolers/ice provided) 2000 Night Crew Briefing Tactics: Feed the bon fire and tell enough old fire stories to last your lifetime…it might get deep, wear your boots! Demob: Sunday AM Coffee provided campers please RSVP BY4/20to Jeff@Lwarren.com Logistics: Toget to Roby’s Farm: Goto Smith Rock State Park, turn right on Smith Rock Loop, a gravel road w/30 mailboxes and mobile home park just past the parking area. Proceed down the gravel road tothe second house onthe left… signs will bein place. Lodging: Lots of camping space available on site. Many motels and restaurants in Redmond, 6 miles south. SeeYa There! Along the way, he excelled asa dis­ trict fire management officer and forest-level fire ecologist for the Forest Service. Then the National Park Service wooed this mathemat­ ics graduate over to their side ofthe wildland fire equation. Inthe late 1990s, Gleason retired his Forest Service badge to become a wildland fire specialist and deputy fire management officer for the National Park Service’s Rocky Mountain Region. But the core of Paul Gleason’sleg­ endary wildland fire expertise came from his two decades of hotshot firefighting. Beginning in 1979, Paul devoted 12 years as superin­ tendent ofthe Zigzag Interagency Hotshot Crew inthe Forest Service’s Pacific Northwest Region. The Gleason Complex, appropriate­ ly based ona fire camp theme, was for the most part a gathering of people who had battled fire along­ side Paul onhis hotshot crew. Itwas his third public memorial. In March, two others were held: in southern California—near the site ofthe 1966 fatality Loop Fire, in which Paul lost 12of his fellow firefighters—and west of Denver atthe foot ofthe Rocky Mountain Front Range.
National Contributions Gleason is widely recognized for his various contributions tothe national wildland fire service. Chief among these are: • Developing the LCES (lookouts, communications, escape routes, and safety zones) concept that has become a foundation for wildland firefighter safety; • Helping to pioneer the wildland firefighter professional tree falling program; and • Relentlessly pursuing the devel­ opment of improved fire behavior training. On Paul Gleason, from Michael Mexico. Inthe world of Western Thoele’s book Fire Line— wildfire, only twoor three hot- Summer Battles ofthe West:* shot bosses were seen ashis equal. … “At forty-four, though he would not have claimed itfor himself, “Hehad marched through all the he ranked asone ofthe lesser fire ranks inthe infantry of forest fire. gods. A Pacific Northwest hotshot Hehad paid his dues and earned crew boss, hewas something ofa his spurs. Hewas known asa man legend inhis own time, a tough, who quoted Chinese philoso­ aggressive, intellectual firefighter phers, read books onthe artof who was the stuff of stories told warfare, and, inthe off-seasons, in fire camps from Alaska toNew wasa rock climber who took onthe big walls all over the West.” * Golden, CO: Fulcrum Publishing, 1995. Atthe 2001 National Hotshot Workshop—before anyone knew cancer had ignited deep inside him—Gleason was given the Golden Pulaski Lifetime Achievement Award for his “longevity, leadership, versatility, and hard work” in dedicating his life to wildland fire management. “Paul lives and breathes fire,” explained Mike Hilbruner, the national applied fire ecologist for the Forest Service, atthe presenta­ tion ceremony. “His years with the hotshot program, together with his Forest Service and [National] Park Service work in fire ecology, exhib­ itan outstanding versatility.” “Now,” Hilbruner continued, “heis expanding his diversity of experi­ ence by becoming a university instructor—helping to prepare the next generation of fire managers and fire researchers.” Gleason Forte: Teaching Teaching was always oneof this expert firefighter’s prime fortes. Inthe last decade of Paul’s life, myri- Ifyou were to pick the most important character trait foran effective leader, what would that be? Paul Gleason: It would be mindfulness. That abili­ tyto take in your surroundings and sort out the important stuff, tobe aware, tobe vigilant. ad students came into contact with him, either directly or indirectly, through fire behavior courses S–290to S–590. Paul literally “wrote the book” for all or parts of these national courses. A Gleason Complex attendee remembered how much he enjoyed Gleason’s fire critiques—his class­ room dissections of incidents han­ dled byhis crew after they were over—almost as much asthe actu­ al firefighting under Paul. There isno question that Paul’s aggressive, heads-up actions saved severely burned firefighter Geoffrey Hatch’s life onthe 1990 fatality Dude Fire. A popular misconcep­ tion is that this experience planted the seed for Gleason’s LCES brain­ child. The tragic impact of single­ handedly finding the six dead fire­ fighters onthe Dude Fire no doubt convinced Gleason of LCES’s value. But this promoter of firefighter safety had been driving around with “LCES” onhis pickup’scus­ tom license plates for the prior 4 years. Asa tribute to Paul’s penchant for teaching—and learning—“The Paul Gleason Wildland Fire Scholarship Fund” has been estab­ lished at Colorado State University to help support undergraduate stu­ dents pursuing studies in wildland fire science. “This will help contin­ uethe work Paul wasso dedicated to doing,” explains his wife Karen Miranda Gleason.
Supporting Women on Fireline Often overlooked in Paul’s lengthy wildland fire legacy ishis promo­ tion and support of women onthe fireline. Oneof the first women inthe Nation to penetrate the historic all-male hotshot ranks—onthe Zigzag Hotshot Crew in 1976— confided recently that she couldn’t have survived and endured without Paul Gleason’s encouragement and optimism. A true teacher, he could instill in others not only his wildland fire savvy, but also his self-assurance and wily determination totry to understand and overcome all obstacles. Indeed, as early as 1983, the icono­ clastic Gleason had hired 7 women onhis 20-person hotshot crew. By 1985, often tothe bewilderment of other hotshot crews atthe time, his lead pulaski was—watch out, fellas—a woman. Gleason Trademark: Strength Gleason’s sometimes seemingly unbridled physical strength, prowess, and resilience were another of this man’s vibrant trade­ marks. “In 1978, I remember see­ ing Gleason do45 good pullups,” remarked a Gleason Complex attendee. In addition to being a luminary inthe world of wildland fire, Paul was also a nationally rec­ ognized rock climber. Heand his brother Phil claimed several first ascents of western precipices. A memorial stone for Paul is being placed near the entryway tothe Japanese Gardens in Portland, OR. Itis a special vantage point from which the majestic, glaciated faces of Mount Hood, Mount Adams, What makes you want to follow someone? Paul Gleason: Confidence, knowing for certain that the person making the call has your safety foremost in their mind. And knowing that the job you are about to take onis the right thing todo, that it makes sense. Mount St. Helens, and Mount Rainier—all climbed by Gleason (he summited Rainier atage 16)— canbe viewed. “Paul loves to challenge himself mentally and physically,” Mike Hilbruner said atthe Golden Pulaski award ceremony in 2001. “Those who have worked with Paul have seen him fall back into cut­ ting order [dig fireline with the crew] whenever he could—without compromising his crew’s safety. As superintendent, he didn’t have todo that. Butit’s typical Gleason— demonstrating an around-the­ clock, assertive, hands-on ground- pounder work ethic.” Paul Gleason reaching out for a fire tool to extinguish a hotspot inside a snag. Photo: John Gale, USDA Forest Service, LaGrande Hotshots, LaGrande, OR, 1987. Trickster, Too Paul’s underlying, often irreverent and mischievous humor—yes, hehad a good dose of trickster inhis soul, too—was also celebrated atthe Gleason Complex. But the Gleason traits recollected most by this part ofhis “fire family” were his remarkable tenacity and grit. Paul was diagnosed with colon and liver cancer last spring. Next came 6 months of intensive chemothera­ py. Atthe Gleason Complex, the people who helped take care of Paul ashis body and energy slowly atrophied—but never his positive spirit—all marveled at this man’s willpower and courage. Paul Gleason was never afraid of death; he never gave uphis hope to continue living. Tough Loss to Absorb Tothe incredulity and sorrow ofthe national—even international— wildland fire community, Paul Gleason died onthe morning of February 27, 2003. Hewas 57 years old. “I remain astonished athow vividly Paul lives onin our talk, his non­ stop wisdom, and his sense for the beauties of more action and less talk,” recalls Dr. Karl E. Weick, Rensis Likert Distinguished University Professor of Organiza­ tional Behavior and Psychology atthe University of Michigan Business School. Weick is internationally
renowned for his research on safety and decisionmaking in many envi­ ronments, including wildland fire. “Paul Gleason made abig impact onmy life, despite a mere handful of contacts,” said Dr. Weick. “Ican only wonder inawe atthe even greater impact hemay have hadon those who shared much longer, more intimate moments with him. I know that the whole [wildland fire] community must find this a tough loss to absorb.” Dr. Marty Alexander, a senior fire behavior research officer with the Canadian Forest Service in Edmonton, Alberta, ranks Gleason with a handful of “historic fire fig­ ures” inthe last century in North America and Australia. “Unfortun­ ately, Paul’s time was far too short,” Alexander laments. “Buthe definitely has had an effect onmy outlook on wildland fire.” Paul Lives OnIn 2001, atage 55, under the mandatory Federal firefighter series retirement rules, Paul was required to retire. Still ablaze with enthusiasm and desire to pursue his wildland fire vocation, he wasn’t about to downshift gears. Sohe sprinted directly into his fire sciences teaching post atthe uni­ versity level. He also hit the open road asa wildland fire science con­ sultant. Oneof his first stops was Switzerland. On December 12, 2002, Paul Gleason’s wife Karen Miranda Gleason sent ane-mail to friends and family commenting on Paul’s deteriorating condition: Many ofyou have known Paul asa supervisor, a teacher and train­ er, or just a great example ofa positive person and firefighter who has lived life tothe fullest in many interesting circumstances. … But when people refer to Paul as “a great role model,” “an amaz­ ing person,” even “a hero of sorts inthe fire community,” he doesn’t understand this very well. He doesn’t think heis special— just an ordinary guy who always wanted todo a good job. … “Why would such a legendary fire person as Paul find time to come toa place where wildland fires defi­ nitely donot head the list of natu­ ral hazards?” asks Britta Allgöwer, senior research scientist and proj­ ect leader inthe Department of Geography atthe University of Zurich. “Maybe that’s just it,” answers Allgöwer, who hired Gleason to come toher country to evaluate the fuel load and help inher quest to develop an ecosystem management strategy for the Swiss National Park. “Paul was genuinely interested in everything that con­ cerns fire. He literally and truly lived fire.” What doyou consider your strengths tobe? Paul Gleason: [Pause.] Probably endurance. And more specifically, enduring adversity and using that experience to make something good come outof it. Paul has become more introspec­ tive now, spending much time in spiritual practices of Buddhism, which he finds comforting, focus­ ingon the tenets of patience and compassion. Like a forest return­ ing over time after a burn and the cycles of nature, so does Paul believe nowin rebirth ofall living beings. … In short, now, without much abil­ ityto fight the fire, heis becom­ ing the wise old master sitting onthe rock ina purple robe after climbing tothe topof the moun­ tain, watching the awesome power of fire burning the land­ scape, which he will become part ofone day. Professor Allgöwer recalls how the pony-tailed Gleason “fell in love” with the Swiss National Park’s forests. A portion of this Switzerland sojourn—in which Paul’s wife Karen was able to join him—included pursuing his hands-on zeal for mountaineering. “Paul loved to explore everything around him,” confirms Allgöwer. “Andhe also loved to explore his limits. Like trying to solo a30­ foot-high [9-m] 5.9 [difficult] climb late inthe day all byhim­ self—without being sure whether ornot he could ‘dothe last couple of moves’—ashe confessed tome later!” “To work with Paul wasa revela­ tion,” says Allgöwer. “Although the great wildland fire expert, he never superimposed his reasoning and opinions tohis surroundings here. Together, ideas and hypotheses were formulated and passionately debated.”
Paul Gleason rock climbing atone ofhis favorite spots near Mt. Hood, OR. Photo: Jeff Hunt, Breckenridge, CO, 1982. “Paul lives on,” Allgöwer insists. “Whenever his name is mentioned, I always notice a warm glance in people’s eyes—even more so, now.” Class and Grace “Clearly, Paul was suffering beyond what any human is prepared to endure,” said friend Merrill Kaufmann, a research plant physi­ ologist for the Forest Service’s Rocky Mountain Research Station, onthe severity of Paul’s aggressive, fatal cancer. “Though, Ican truly say that Paul lived through his recent illness with the same class and grace we have always known ofhim.” ■ The class and grace for which Paul was known shone through inhis written words of farewell tohis friends:
I NTERVIEW WITH PAUL G LEASON Jim Cook and Angela TomP aul Gleason’s career asa fire­ fighter spanned parts of five decades. He started asan 18­ year-old crew member ona south­ ern California hotshot crew and culminated his career asa profes­ sorof wildland fire science at Colorado State University. Paul grew upin southern California, the son ofa traveling evangelist preacher. He became an accomplished rock climber inhis teens and continued to climb throughout his entire life. In 1964, hegot his first jobas a firefighter onthe Angeles National Forest, CA. He continued to work there onthe Dalton Hotshot Crew through 1970, with the exception ofa 1­ year stint inthe U.S. Army. From 1971 to 1973, he went to college and earned a degree in mathemat­ ics. During this time, he also traveled and climbed extensively. He returned to work asa firefighter in 1974 asthe assistant foreman fora 20-person regional reinforcement crew onthe Okanogan National Forest, OR. Then, in 1977, he took the job asthe assistant superin­ tendent ofthe Zigzag Interagency Hotshot Crew onthe Mount Hood National Forest, OR, moving upto Jim Cook isthe training projects coordina­ tor for fire operations safety for the USDA Forest Service, National Interagency Fire Center, Boise, ID; and Angie Tomis a10­ year seasonal wildland firefighter now serving onthe Midewin Interagency Hotshot Crew based onthe Midewin National Tallgrass Prairie, Wilmington, IL. * Reprinted from the Website (http://fireleadersip.gov) ofthe Wildland Fire Leadership Team, chartered bythe National Wildfire Coordinating Group’s Training Working Team. The interview was conducted in Denver, CO, on February 26, 2003. During his career, Paul Gleason was front and center on three well-known fires ofthe modern era—the Loop Fire in 1966, the Dude Fire in 1990, and the Cerro Grande Fire in 2000. superintendent in 1979. He remained in that role until 1992. He then transferred tothe Arapa­ ho–Roosevelt National Forest asa district fire management officer and eventually became the forest’s fire ecologist. Paul’s next move wasto another fire agency in 1999 asthe deputy fire management officer for the Rocky Mountain Region ofthe National Park Service. In 2001, mandatory retirement atage 55 took Paul away from the Federal fire service and into academia. For the next 2 years, Paul was adjunct professor for the wildland fire sci­ ence program at Colorado State University. He remained in this role until he lost his battle with cancer in 2003. During his career, Paul Gleason was front and center on three well- known fires ofthe modern era— the Loop Fire in 1966, the Dude Fire in 1990, and the Cerro Grande Fire in 2000. His role on these three touchstone fires gave rise tohis passion for firefighter safety and the “student-of-fire” philoso­ phy that he crusaded for. Hewas a leader of firefighters anda leader for the wildland fire service. Paul’s contributions are far reach­ ing. He teamed up with D. Douglas Dent to pioneer the professional tree falling program for wildland Paul Gleason ensuring that his crew members safely cross the Illinois River onthe Siskiyou National Forest in Oregon during the 1987 Silver Fire. Gleason crossed last. Photo: John Gale, USDA Forest Service, LaGrande Hotshots, LaGrande, OR, 1987.
firefighters. He developed the “lookouts, communications, escape routes, safety zones” concept that has become the modern foundation of firefighter safety (Gleason 1992). Hewas very involved inthe devel­ opment of fire behavior training, with a focus on taking the scientif­ ic aspects of extreme fire behavior and making them understandable concepts for every firefighter. He reached outside the fire service and collaborated with experts, such asDr. Karl Weick, who were doing research inthe realm of decision- making and high-reliability organi­ zations. Inthe final tally, Paul was always a “student of fire”—a role model for others. Tothe very endof his life, he engaged in teaching and learn­ ing about fire. The opportunity toask Paul the following questions about leadership came the day before he died andat his insis­ tence. Cook/Tom: What makes you want to follow someone? Gleason: Confidence, knowing for certain that the person making the call has your safety foremost in their mind. And knowing that the job you are about to take onis the right thing todo, that it makes Gleason* Finney, M.A.; Bartlette, R.; Bradshaw, L.; Close, K.; Gleason, P. 2002. Report on fire behavior, fuel treatments, and fire suppression. In: Graham, R.T., tech. ed. Hayman Fire case study analysis. Interim draft. Fort Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station: 21–149. [See: <http://www.fs.fed.us/ rm/hayman_fire/>.] Gleason, P. 1991. LCES—Akey to safety inthe wildland fire environment. Fire Management Notes. 52(4): 9. [See also: Wildfire News & Notes. 5(2): 1.] Gleason, P. 1994. Appendix G: Lookouts, communications, escape routes, safety zones— “LCES.” Orig. doc. June 1991. In: Russell, W.L., Jr. An Analysis—Learning from our mistakes: Lessons gleaned from the 1994 shelter deploy­ ments inthe Southwest area and the South Canyon Fire, * Compiled bythe issue coordinators, Martin E. Alexander and David A. Thomas. Colorado. Albuquerque, NM: USDA Forest Service, Southwest Region: 77–82. [see: http://www.fireleader­ ship.gov/toolbox/documents/l ces_gleason.html] Gleason, P. 1994. Unprepared for the worst case scenario. Wildfire. 3(3): 23–26. Gleason, P. 1994. Sun Tzu and appropriate suppression response. Wildfire. 3(4): 27–29. Gleason, P.; Robinson, D. 1998. After the fire a still small voice. In: Close, K.; Bartlette (Hartford), R.A., eds. Fire Management Under Fire (Adapting to Change), Proceedings ofthe 1994 Interior West Fire Council Meeting and Program; 1994 November 1-4; Coeur d’Alene, ID. Fairfield, WA: International Association of Wildland Fire: 191–199. Greenlee, J.M.; Thomas, D.; Gleason, P. 1995. From cos­ mosto chaos. Wildfire. 4(1): 7–11. sense. Cook/Tom: Whodo you think isa leadership role model and why? Gleason: Chuck Hartley, who was the superintendent when I first went to work onthe Dalton Hotshots. Why … because he instilled that confidence. When I worked for Chuck, I never doubted fora minute that our safety was always the first thing inhis mind. Plus, Chuck ran the crew ina way that allowed usto have a sense of confidence in ourselves andin our own capabilities as well. Gleason teamed up with D. Douglas Dent to pioneer the professional tree-falling program for wildland firefighters. Cook/Tom: Ifyou were to pick the most important character trait foran effective leader, what would that be? Gleason: That’sa hard oneto answer. [Pause.] Butif there hasto beone, it would be mindfulness. That ability to take in your sur­ roundings and sort out the impor­ tant stuff, tobe aware, tobe vigi­ lant. Then take all that informa­ tion, putit together, and see ifit makes sense toyou. Another part of that mindfulness concept isthe ability to relate toall types ofpeo­ ple and see what they can con­ tribute.
Cook/Tom: Are leaders born or made … explain? Gleason: I think they are born, andI know we might disagree on this some. Certainly, many impor­ tant leadership skills canbe devel­ oped, butI feel that trait of mind­ fulness isan innate capability that someone either hasor doesn’t have. Cook/Tom: Regarding leadership, what quote comes to mind? Gleason: “Those aremy people. Wherever they goI must follow, forI am their leader.” Cook/Tom: Thinking back to your youth, what influences helped you become a leader? Gleason: My father traveled for his work, frequently with the whole family. Inour travels we camped outa lot and I think that wasa big part ofwhy I have always been drawn tothe outdoors. Growing upin southern California, I remember many summers and falls where the hills around the Los Angeles area would beon fire and especially the memory of long strands of fire moving across the hills at night. I think I knew I wanted tobe a fire­ fighter bythe time Iwas in5th grade. Climbing was another big influence onme. I remember one time my brother Phil andI dida climb late inthe fall andwe weren’t able to finish the whole climb before dark. Sowe hadto spend the night up there suspend­ edin our slings with just the stuff wehad onus, which wasn’t much. Man, itgot cold when the sun went down, I think itwas in November. Cook/Tom: What doyou consider your strengths tobe? Gleason: Letme think about that fora minute. [Pause.] Probably Paul Gleason (left), with Merrill Kaufmann, a research forest ecologist for the USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, standing onthe site ofthe Snowtop Fire aday after the fire. On July 10, 1993, the fire burned to within 4-1/2 feet (1.4m) of Kaufmann’s cabin in Colorado. Gleason wasat the cabin during the fire and helped pro­ tect it. The cabin survived because Kaufmann had covered it with a metal roof, thinned the surrounding trees, and removed nearby fuels. Photo: Evelyn Kaufmann, 1993. endurance, and more specifically enduring adversity and using that experience to make something good come outof it. Cook/Tom: How about your weak­ nesses? Gleason: I didn’t know Ihad any! [Laughs. Pause.] My biggest weak­ ness is patience, wanting tosee things happen too quickly orget changes in place right away. Not having the patience tolet things develop. Sometimes I’m that way with the people I work closely with. My expectations of their time and commitment could be unreal­ istic on occasion. Cook/Tom: Since you started in 1964, what are the biggest improvements you have witnessed inthe wildland fire service? Gleason: I think that would have tobe the increased focus on fire­ fighter safety. Cook/Tom: What doyou consider the worst changes you have seen inthe wildland fire service? Gleason: Lack of aggressiveness onthe fireline. This might sound like a contradiction tothe last answer, butI don’t think so. What I mean here is that there seems tobe alot of indecisiveness on select­ inga strategy and getting with itto make it happen.
� � Gleason was very involved in fire behavior training, was, what wedid, whywe didit. ButI have to live with those deci­ with a focus on making the scientific aspects of sions because at that time itwas extreme fire behavior understandable for every my responsibility. firefighter. Cook/Tom: Describe afew ofthe toughest decisions or dilemmas you have faced. Gleason: The first thing that comes to mind isthe Dude Fire … and especially the decision to leave the subdivision andgo down into Walk Moore Canyon. I passed a number of people coming upthe line ina hurry asI was going down. I talked toa couple ofthe other hotshot superintendents. Everyone thought there wasno way that anyone working inthe bottom of that canyon could make itout alive. Even so, afew ofus continued on down into the canyon. Wemet Hatch and then began to find the others onthe Perryville Crew … but that’sa whole other story. Cook/Tom: What helped to guide youin that decision? Gleason: [Pause.] Idon’t know exactly whyI did that, butit just seemed like the right thing todo. I just knew I would have to live with my decision. It’s like the Cerro Grande thing. That was another tough situation. We made our deci­ sions in good faith and using our best judgment based on what we knew. I remember how difficult itwas togo to talk tothe people inLos Alamos and tell them whoI Cook/Tom: Doyou think a legacy is important and, ifso, what do want your legacy tobe? Gleason: Ifyou choose to lead oth­ ers you will have a legacy. But that legacy will be determined by those that follow you. [Pause.] I suppose I would want my legacy tobe that firefighters begin to realize the importance of being a student of fire and that Iwas able to help make that happen. Reference Gleason, P. 1992. LCES and other thoughts. National Wildfire Coordinating Group, Wildland Fire Leadership Committee, Website <http://www.fire­ leadership.gov/toolbox/documents/lces_g leason.html>. ■ \Çà{xy|ÇtÄ àtÄÄç? ctâÄ ãtá tÄãtçá t ÂáàâwxÇà Éyy|ÜxÊ‰t ÜÉÄx ÅÉwxÄ yÉÜÉà{xÜáA
G UIDELINES FORC ONTRIBUTORS Editorial Policy Fire Management Today (FMT) isan interna­ tional quarterly magazine for the wildland fire community. FMT welcomes unsolicited manu­ scripts from readers onany subject related to fire management. Because space isa considera­ tion, long manuscripts might be abridged bythe editor, subject to approval bythe author; FMT does print short pieces of interest to readers. Submission Guidelines Submit manuscripts to either the general man­ ager orthe managing editor at: USDA Forest Service Attn: April J. Baily, F&AM Staff Mail Stop 1107 1400 Independence Avenue, SW Washington, DC 20250-1107 tel. 202-205-0891, fax 202-205-1272 e-mail: abaily@fs.fed.us USDA Forest Service Attn: Hutch Brown, Office of Communication Mail Stop 1111 1400 Independence Avenue, SW Washington, DC 20250-1111 tel. 202-205-1028, fax 202-205-0885 e-mail: hutchbrown@fs.fed.us Mailing Disks. Donot mail disks with elec­ tronic files tothe above addresses, because mail will be irradiated and the disks could beren­ dered inoperable. Send electronic files bye-mail orby courier service to: USDA Forest Service Attn: Hutch Brown, 2CEN Yates 201 14th Street, SW Washington, DC 20024 Ifyou have questions about a submission, please contact the managing editor, Hutch Brown. Paper Copy. Type or word-process the manu­ script on white paper (double-spaced) onone side. Include the complete name(s), title(s), affil­ iation(s), and address(es) ofthe author(s), as well as telephone and fax numbers ande-mail information. Ifthe same ora similar manuscript is being submitted elsewhere, include that infor­ mation also. Authors who are affiliated should submit a camera-ready logo for their agency, institution, or organization. Style. Authors are responsible for using wild- land fire terminology that conforms tothe latest standards setby the National Wildfire Coordinating Group under the National Interagency Incident Management System. FMT uses the spelling, capitalization, hyphenation, and other styles recommended inthe United States Government Printing Office Style Manual, as required bythe U.S. Department of Agriculture. Authors should use the U.S. system of weight and measure, with equivalent values inthe metric system. Tryto keep titles concise and descriptive; subheadings and bulleted material are useful and help readability. Asa general rule of clear writing, use the active voice (e.g., write, “Fire managers know…” and not, “Itis known…”). Provide spellouts for all abbrevia­ tions. Consult recent issues (onthe World Wide Webat <http://www.fs.fed.us/fire/planning/firenote.htm >) for placement ofthe author’s name, title, agency affiliation, and location, as well asfor style of paragraph headings and references. Tables. Tables should be logical and under­ standable without reading the text. Include tables atthe endof the manuscript. Photos and Illustrations. Figures, illustrations, overhead transparencies (originals are prefer­ able), and clear photographs (color slides or glossy color prints are preferable) are often essential tothe understanding of articles. Clearly label all photos and illustrations (figure 1, 2, 3, etc.; photograph A, B, C, etc.). Atthe endof the manuscript, include clear, thorough fig­ ure and photo captions labeled inthe same wayas the corresponding material (figure 1, 2, 3; photograph A, B, C; etc.). Captions should make photos and illustrations understandable without reading the text. For photos, indicate the name and affiliation ofthe photographer and the year the photo was taken. Electronic Files. See special mailing instruc­ tions above. Please label all disks carefully with name(s) of file(s) and system(s) used. Ifthe manuscript is word-processed, please submit a3-1/2 inch, IBM-compatible disk together with the paper copy (see above) asan electronic file inone of these formats: WordPerfect 5.1for DOS; WordPerfect 7.0or earlier for Windows 95; Microsoft Word 6.0or earlier for Windows 95; Rich Text format; or ASCII. Digital photos maybe submitted but must beat least 300 dpi and accompanied bya high-resolution (preferably laser) printout for editorial review and quality control during the printing process. Donot embed illustrations (such as maps, charts, and graphs) inthe electronic file for the manuscript. Instead, submit each illustration at1,200 dpi ina separate file using a standard interchange for­ mat such asEPS, TIFF, or JPEG, accompanied bya high-resolution (preferably laser) printout. For charts and graphs, include the data needed to reconstruct them. Release Authorization. Non-Federal Government authors must sign a release to allow their work tobe inthe public domain andon the World Wide Web. In addition, all photos and illustrations require a written release bythe photographer or illustrator. The author, photo, and illustration release forms are available from General Manager April Baily.
