Strategic analysis ofthe aviation capacity for the Integrated Management System of Rural Fires in Portugal from 2025 Análise estratégica da capacidade de aviação do Sistema de Gestão Integrada de Fogos Rurais em Portugal a partir de 2025
Contents 1 Preamble ...................................................................................................................... 32 Terminology and definitions ......................................................................................... 62.1 Respondents 2.2Key terms 2.3 Abbreviations and definitions 2.4 Water, foam, gel (water enhancer) and retardant 2.5 Aircraft categories 2.6 Operational Periods 3 Executive Summary .................................................................................................... 144 Introduction ................................................................................................................. 174.1 General 4.2 Aerial firefighting 4.2 Strategic analysis project 4.4 Project scope 4.5 Project methodology 4.6Key characteristics 5 Governance ................................................................................................................ 225.1 Enabling legislation and regulations 5.2 Clear accountabilities and responsibilities 5.3 Inter-agency co-ordination and collaboration 5.4 International collaboration - Spain 6 National strategy ........................................................................................................ 346.1 Guiding principles 6.2 National Aerial Firefighting Strategic Plan 7 Operational command, coordination and supervision ................................................ 377.1 National aircraft coordination and support 7.2 Aerial coordination and supervision 7.3 Training for users of aerial means 8 Aerial capabilities ........................................................................................................ 478.1 Determining capability and capacity 8.2 Opportunities for savings 8.3 Initial attack resources 8.4 Extended attack resources 8.5 Resourcing risks 8.6 Special capabilities 9 Support systems and processes ................................................................................ 729.1 Safety and safety culture 9.2 Data and data management 9.3 Incident Control System 9.4 Lessons Learned system 9.5 Procurement of commercial services 9.6 Aerial resources classification 9.7Use of simulation 10 Research and development........................................................................................ 8610.1 Economic research 10.2 Airborne intelligence gathering Appendix 1 Operational and technical issues .................................................................. 89 Appendix 2 Consultation ................................................................................................... 9901 Preamble 1.1 Project sponsors This paper isthe main report ofa project established to conduct a high-level review and strategic analysis of Portugal’s aerial fire management capacity, with a focus on capabilities required for aerial firefighting beyond 2025. The project is sponsored primarily bythe Autoridade Nacional de Emergência e Proteção Civil (Civil Protection Authority, ANEPC) and the Força Aérea Portuguesa (Portuguese Air Force, FAP) and facilitated on behalf ofall stakeholder agencies bythe Agência para a Gestão Integrada de Fogos Rurais (Agency for Integrated Rural Fire Management, AGIF). 1.2 Observations, Findings, Recommendations and Suggestions This report includes Observations, Findings and Recommendations: Nature of Recommendations Recommendations are advisory only, and are made for consideration bythe relevant agency(s) or institution(s). These agencies and institutions will need to consider Recommendations inthe context of their overall responsibilities and priorities. No obligation onany agency or institution to endorse, adopt or implement the Recommendations of this report should be inferred. This report also includes “Suggestions” regarding operational and technical matters in Appendix 1. (Refer to paragraph 1.5 “Technical and operational matters”, onthe next page.) Findings are important conclusions synthesised from evidence evaluated bythe project, butdo not necessarily require specific action by stakeholders. Recommendations provide consolidated advice, proposals or suggestions for addressing important issues, for consideration by stakeholders. Observations are important points that were considered tobe worth highlighting to stakeholders and readers. In some cases, Observations provide guidance for developing subsequent Findings and Recommendations. Observations donot necessarily require further action.
1.3 Limitations of consultation Aerial firefighting in Portugal hasa large and very diverse range of stakeholders. Many organisations and individuals arein a position to offer valuable contributions and insights. Asfar as practicable, the project consulted with a representative group of stakeholders, however itwas not practical for all stakeholders tobe directly consulted. Some interest groups also declined tobe consulted. 1.4 Nature of report This report isnot intended tobe a scientific paper. It includes reference to material that has not been formally published or peer reviewed, and also references some research that was conducted through informal consultation and discussion. 1.5 Technical and operational matters The project covered by this report is intended to focus on strategic matters, however a number of issues ofa technical or operational nature that would benefit from further consideration bythe relevant agencies and institutions were identified during the information gathering phase. These issues have been communicated to stakeholders inan interim Supplementary Report for their information and consideration. A summary ofthe technical and operational matters identified inthe Supplementary Report is provided in Appendix 1to this report. The summary in Appendix 1 includes “Suggestions”: 1.6 Confidential information The project adopted the principle that, asfar as practicable, relevant information should bein the public domain, and that the need to treat any information as confidential should be minimised. However, for commercial reasons, some information provided tothe project has been treated as confidential (for example: pricing information and proprietary technical information). In addition, some people and organisations provided information onthe condition that they notbe identified in project reports or that the information provided be treated as confidential. Where appropriate, some information supplied tothe project team has therefore necessarily been regarded as confidential. Confidential information, and any related observations, findings or recommendations, has been provided directly tothe project sponsors in auxiliary reports. Suggestions: are only relevant to technical and operational matters, and are suggested options for addressing the issues raised. Suggestions are mainly based on feedback from respondents, or experience with similar issues in other jurisdictions. They are suggestions only, for consideration bythe responsible agencies. The responsible agencies maybe aware of other options for resolving these issues.
1.7 Language This report was originally written inthe English language, asthe primary international language of aviation. Most consultations were conducted in English. Care should be taken when reading or interpreting versions of this reports in languages other than English. The definitive version of this report isthe original English language version. 1.8 Conflict-of-interest The project utilised the services ofthe consultancy business Avtract (Australian Business Number 38 707274543) to assist with information gathering, analysis and preparation of reports. Avtract has declared that tothe best ofits knowledge, there isno conflict-of-interest in relation tothe project orthe preparation of this report. Avtract hasno beneficial interest inany products or solutions canvassed or recommended. 1.9 Acknowledgements The project team would like to gratefully acknowledge the many people who provided information and gave their time freely to participate in interviews and respond to questions. The project also acknowledges and extends thanks to suppliers of images and illustrations used in project reports. 1.10 Version Version 1,0EN September 2023
02 Terminology and definitions 2.1 Respondents Any person, agency or institution that provided verbal or written information tothe project team, whether through interview, discussion or responding toa written project questionnaire is referred toin this report asa respondent. 2.2Key terms Terms and definitions used in aviation are often open to interpretation. Different sectors and countries tend touse some terms in different ways. Translations between languages may increase the risk ofmis-interpretation. The following list explains how certain key terms are used in this report: Aerial fire management: refers toany useof aerial means to support prevention, mitigation, response or recovery activities associated with landscape fires, including planned fires Aerial firefighting: isa subset of aerial fire management and refers tothe useof aerial means to support response to unplanned landscape fires. Aerial firefighting includes direct attack and indirect attack, supervision, command, intelligence gathering, imaging, mapping, transport and other related operations Aerial attack orair attack: isa subset of aerial firefighting and refers tothe dispensing of suppressants or retardants from aircraft to directly or indirectly assist with controlling landscape fires orto protect assets from landscape fire Aircraft: refers toany air vehicle and includes rotary-wing aircraft and fixed-wing aircraft; and includes remotely piloted or optionally piloted air vehicles Aeroplane: refers to conventional fixed-wing aircraft; and does not include remote or optionally piloted air vehicles unless stated otherwise Helicopter: refers to conventional rotary-wing aircraft; and does not include remote or optionally piloted air vehicles unless stated otherwise Foam: refers only to water with an added Class A surfactant foaming solution (refer also tothe Water, Foam, Gel, Retardant table at Section 2.4) Retardant: refers only toa slurry of water combined with a commercial fire-retardant product, that acts to chemically retard the fire (refer also tothe Water, Foam, Gel, Retardant table at Section 2.4) Coordination: refers tothe organisation of different elements ofa complex activity soas to enable them to work together effectively Supervision: refers to overseeing the performance ofan actor function. Supervision may involve providing direction toa person or agency Leased: means the services ofan aircraft are provided byan Air Operator under contract, ona full-service basis. The term is interchangeable with “contracted”.
2.3 Abbreviations and Definitions The following Table sets out Abbreviations and Definitions as they are used in this report. For convenience, the Table below also includes some abbreviations and definitions that are not used inthe report, but may appear in related documents or references. Refer also tothe table of Aircraft Categories at Section 2.5Esp = Spanish term En = English term Term Meaning in Portuguese Meaning in English Additional explanation AAO Área de Apoio Operacional (CMA) [See CMA] AFF (En) (Seguimento automatizado devoo) Automated Flight Following National, multi-agency system for aircraft tracking and event recording inU.S.A. AFOCELCA Agrupamento Complementar de Empresas do Grupo and The Navigator Company e Grupo ALTRI Complementary Group of Companies ofThe Navigator Company Group and ALTRI Group Joint venture of forestry companies to provide resources AGIF Agência para a Gestão Integrada de Fogos Rurais Agency for the Integrated Management of Rural Fires ANAC Autoridade Nacional da Aviação Civil National Institute of Civil Aviation of Portugal Portuguese Civil Aviation Authority ANEPC Autoridade Nacional de Emergência e Proteção Civil National Emergency and Civil Protection Authority ARENA (En) (Sistema nacional multi- agências para a gestão e utilização de dados sobre aeronaves) National multi-agency system for managing and using fire and emergency aircraft data in Australia ATA Ataque Ampliado Extended Attack ATI Ataque Inicial Initial Attack ATU (En) (Unidade de Telemetria Automatizada) Automated Telemetry Unit Anadd-onto AFFin theU.S.A.; to provide aircraft event data AVB Avião Bombardeiro Aviões Bombardeiros Bomber plane Bomber planes Fixed-wing firebomber Fixed-wing firebombers (refer to Section 2.5) BHATI Brigada Helitransportada de Ataque Inicial Heli transported Initial Attack Brigade Heli-transported brigades of8-12 firefighters, with captain/leader (see also EHATI) BRIF (Esp) (em espanhol) Brigadas de Refuerzo de Incendios Forestales Forest Fire Reinforcement Brigades Specialist air-transported forest firefighting units (Spain) CATE Companhia de Ataque Estendido Extended Attack Company CB Corpo de Bombeiros Fire Department
Term Meaning in Portuguese Meaning in English Additional explanation CBS (En) (Simulação em computador) Computer-Based Simulation CMA Centro de Meios Aéreos Centros de Meios Aéreos Air Means Centre Air Means Centres Air base Air bases AAO Área de Apoio Operacional Operational Support Area ina CMA Airbase operations centre ZOA Zona de Operações de Aeronaves Aircraft Operations Zone ina CMA Ramp, movement area CDOS Comando Distrital de Operações de Socorro District Operations Command CNEPC Comando Nacional de Emergência e Protecção Civil National Emergency and Civil Protection Command Also used to refer tothe Command Centre COCO (En) (Propriedade do Contratante, Operado pelo Contratante) Contractor-Owned, Contractor-Operated Aircraft owned and operated bya commercial third party CODIS Comandante Operacionais Distritais District Operational Commander CONEPC Comandante Nacional de Emergência e Proteção Civil National Commander of Emergency and Civil Protection COPAR Coordenador de Operações Aéreas Coordinator ofAir Operations Air Attack Officer orAir Attack Supervisor COPAR-Ar Coordenador de Operações Aéreas - Aéreo Airborne Coordinator ofAir Operations COPAR-T Coordenador de Operações Aéreas - Terra Ground-based Coordinator ofAir Operations COS COS(OS) Comandante de Operações de Socorro Operations Commander or Relief Commander DECIR Dispositivo Especial de Combate a Incêndios Rurais Special Rural Fire Fighting Device Integrated firefighting assets and organisation for rural fires DIROP Diretiva Operacional Operational Directive [see also DON] DON Diretiva Operacional Nacional National Operational Directive DON-DECIR Diretiva Operacional Nacional n.º2 –DECIR National Operational Directive no. 2 - DECIR EASA (En) (Agência Europeia para a Segurança da Aviação) European Aviation Safety Agency EHATI Equipa Helitransportada de Ataque Inicial Heliborne Initial Attack Team Heli-transported team of usually 5 firefighters (see also BHATI) ENB Escola Nacional de Bombeiros Portuguese National Fire School National fire training college EU (En) (União Europeia) European Union FAP Força Aérea Portuguesa Portuguese Air Force
Term Meaning in Portuguese Meaning in English Additional explanation FDI (En) (Índice de perigo de incêndio) Fire Danger Index FEPC Força Especial de Proteção Civil Special Civil Protection Force Technical Force of Civil Protection FWI (En) (Índice meteorológico de incêndios) Fire Weather Index GIPS Grupo de Intervenção, de Proteção e Socorro Intervention, Protection and Relief Group ofGNR GNR specialist firefighting force GIS (En) (Sistema de Informação Geográfica ou Plataforma de Informação Geográfica) Geographic Information System GNR Guarda Nacional Republicana Republic National Guard GPIAAF Gabinete de Prevenção e Investigação de Acidentes com Aeronaves ede Acidentes Ferroviários, Agency for Prevention and Investigation of Aircraft and Railway Accidents Transport safety bureau HEB Helicóptero Bombardeiro Helicópteros Bombardeiros Bomber helicopter Bomber helicopters Rotary-wing firebombing aircraft (refer to Section 2.5) ICNF Instituto da Conservação da Natureza edas Florestas Institute for Nature Conservation and Forestry National Forestry and Conservation department IFAWG (En) (Grupo de trabalho internacional sobre combate aéreo a incêndios) International Fire Aviation Working Group A committee ofthe UN International Strategy for Disaster Reduction ICS (En) (Sistema de Controlo de Incidentes or Sistema de Comando de Incidentes) Incident Control System Sometimes refers to Incident Command System See also SGO IFR (En) (Regras devoo por instrumentos) Instrument Flight Rules ISR (En) (Informações, Vigilância e Reconhecimento) Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance LAT (En) (Aerotanque de grande porte) Large Airtanker Type 1or Type 2 airtanker inthe U.S.A. Interagency Airtanker Board classification system MAA Monitorização Aérea Armada Armed Air Monitoring Loaded patrol MAFFS (En) (Sistema Modular Aéreo de Combate a Incêndio) Modular Airborne Fire Fighting System Proprietary roll-on roll-off drop system using pressuried flow MAI Ministério da Administração Interna The Ministry of Internal Administration Home Affairs Ministry MAPA (Esp) (em espanhol) Ministerio de Agricultura, Pesca y Alimentación Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food Spanish Ministry, previously responsible for Forest Fire. See also MITECO MDN Ministério da Defesa Nacional Ministry of Defence
Term Meaning in Portuguese Meaning in English Additional explanation MITECO (Esp) (em espanhol) Ministerio para la Transición Ecológica yel Reto Demográfico Ministry for Ecological Transition and the Demographic Challenge Spanish Ministry responsible for Forest Fire NAC (En) (Coordenador Nacional de Operações Aéreas) National Aircraft Coordinator or National Air Operations Coordinator NADAIR Núcleo de Apoio à Decisão para a Análise de Incêndios Rurais Decision Support Center for the Analysis of Rural Fires NAFC (En) (Centro Nacional de Combate a Incêndios Aéreos, Austrália) National Aerial Firefighting Centre, Australia NPIRFM (En) (Plano Nacional de Gestão Integrada de Fogos Rurais) National Plan for Integrated Rural Fire Management NVG (En) (Óculos de visão nocturna) Night Vision Goggles See also NVIS NVIS (En) (Sistema de visão nocturna) Night Vision Imaging System See also NVG OMS (En) (Sistema de Gestão de Operações) Operations Management System See SGO anICS OPA Operador Aéreo Operadores Aéreos Air Operator Air Operators OPAR Oficial de Operações Aéreas Air Operations Officer Aircraft Officer Air Support Group Manager RADS (En) (Sistema de queda aérea retardant) Retardant Aerial Delivery System Proprietary gravity drop system using longitudinal doors. Later versions offer computer controlled constant flow RescEU (En) Um subprograma do Mecanismo de Protecção Civil daUE para criar capacidade de reserva A reserve of European capacities Asub-program ofthe EU Civil Protection Mechanism RPA (En) (Aeronave pilotada remotamente) Remotely Piloted Aircraft UAV/Drone See also UAV and UAS SADO Sistema de Apoio à Decisão Operacional Operational Decision Support System Situation reporting and information system SGIFR Sistema para a Gestão Integrada de Fogos Rurais System for the Integrated Management of Rural Fires SGIFR UI Sistema para a Gestão Integrada de Fogos Rurais Unidade de Intervenção System for the Integrated Management of Rural Fires Intervention Unit SGO Sistema de Gestão de Operações Operations Management System ICS-type management system
Term Meaning in Portuguese Meaning in English Additional explanation SIOPS Sistema Integrado de Operações de Proteção e Socorro Integrated System of Protection and Relief Operations Management, command and control structure SOCO (En) (Propriedade do Contratante, Operado pelo Contratante) State-Owned, Contractor- Operated Aircraft owned bythe State and operated bya commercial third-party (Sometimes known as GOCO) SOSO (En) (Propriedade do Estado, Operado pelo Estado) State-Owned, State- Operated Aircraft owned and operated bythe State (Sometimes known as GOGO) TC Tribunal de Contas Portuguese General Accounting Court Contract approval tribunal TRM (En) (Gestão dos recursos da equipa) Team Resource Management An extension of Crew Resource Management UAV (En) (Aeronave pilotada remotamente) Un-crewed Aerial Vehicle UAV/Drone See also RPA UAS (En) Sistemas de Aeronaves não Tripuladas Un-crewed Aerial System UAV/Drone plus ancillary systems VCI Veículo de Combate a Incêndio Veículos de Combate a Incêndios Fire Fighting Vehicle Fire Fighting Vehicles Fire engine, fire truck Fire engines, fire trucks ZOA Zona de Operações de Aeronaves (CMA) [see CMA]
2.4 Water, foam, gel (water enhancer) and retardant Air attack is normally conducted by dispensing either water, foam, gelor retardant. However, these terms are sometimes used interchangeably ormay bemis-used. The following Table describes how the terms are used in this report, and provides some additional information. More detailed information is available through theU.S. Department of Agriculture’s Wildland Fire Chemicals System1. English term Description Action Other information Water Plain water, no additives Suppressant Includes fresh water, sea water, salt water and brackish water unless specified otherwise Usually low cost Foam (often referred toas Class A Foam or Bushfire Foam) Water with the addition of liquid concentrate surfactant which causes bubbles to form when exposed to shearing action of airflow Usually not coloured Suppressant Improves the action of water by increasing surface area, reducing evaporation and helping water to stick to ground or elevated fuels Sometimes (incorrectly) referred toas short-term retardant Available as liquid concentrate; usually used ata concentration between 0.4% and1.0% Concentrate maybe added tothe water from a concentrate tank on- board the aircraft ormay be added tothe water when filling onthe ground Concentrate must be tested and approved for use in aircraft Relatively low cost Gel (often referred toas Water Enhancer) Water with the addition ofa polymer which increases viscosity Sometimes coloured blue Suppressant Improves the action of water by increasing viscosity, improving drop characteristics and reducing evaporation Allows water to remain effective for longer periods than foam Sometimes (incorrectly) referred toas short-term retardant Available asa powder oras liquid concentrate If liquid concentrate is used, itmay be added tothe water from a tank on- board the aircraft ormay be added tothe water when filling onthe ground If powder is used it must be mixed and loaded onthe ground Concentrate or powder must be approved for use in aircraft Medium cost Retardant Slurry of water mixed with pre-prepared commercial product, usually consisting mainly of ammonium or sulphate salts and gum (glue) Usually coloured red Retardant Chemical reaction retards fire. Water isa carrier only and the product is still effective when water has dried out Often referred toas long- term retardant Available as liquid concentrate or powder Requires specialised mixing and loading equipment Ground loaded only (for helicopters the prepared slurry canbe hover-filled from an open tank) Product must be approved for use in aircraft Relatively high cost 1 https://www.fs.usda.gov/rm/fire/wfcs/wildland-fire-chemicals.php2.5 Aircraft categories The following Table briefly describes the categorisation of aircraft currently used for aerial firefighting in Portugal (refer also to Section 9.6): Abbreviation Description English HEBL Helicópteros Bombardeiros Ligeiros Firebombing helicopter – light (normally complemented by5 person firefighting team) HEBM Helicópteros Bombardeiros Médios Firebombing helicopter – medium (normally complemented by8-12 person firefighting team) HEBP Helicópteros Bombardeiros Pesados Firebombing helicopter – heavy HERAC Helicóptero de Reconhecimento, Avaliação e Coordenação Coordination and reconnaissance helicopter AVBM Aviões Bombardeiros Médios Amphibious firebombing aeroplane - medium AVBP Aviões Bombardeiros Pesados Amphibious firebombing aeroplane – heavy AVRAC Aviões de Reconhecimento, Avaliação e Coordenação Coordination and reconnaissance aeroplane 2.6 Operational Periods The following Table describes the Operational Periods (Phases) that are normally used in Portugal to define response and resourcing levels during each calendar year: Phase English Nivel I Phase I (“permanent”) January 1st through May 14th Nivel II Phase IIMay 15th through May 31st Nivel III Phase III June 1st through June 30th Nivel IV Phase IV July 1st through September 30th Nivel III Phase III October 1st through October 15th Nivel II Phase II October 16th through October 31st Nivel I Phase I (“permanent”) November 1st through December 31st
03 Executive Summary Aerial means provide valuable support for the management of rural fire in Portugal. Aerial firefighting is critical to meeting the Vision ofthe National Plan for Integrated Rural Fire Management: Portugal protected from severe rural fires. Portugal is well-placed to deliver a cohesive and effective aerial fire management capacity. There isa strong, legislated strategic framework for integrated fire management, including aerial components, which has recently been revised and renewed. The legislative framework sets out clear responsibilities around the engagement and utilisation of aerial means. Asthe threat to communities andto the environment and the economy from rural fires evolves over coming decades, it will be imperative to ensure that the aerial capabilities and capacities engaged by Portugal are appropriate tothe fire risk, and are effective and represent value-for- money. The National Emergency and Civil Protection Agency (ANEPC) and the Portuguese Air Force (FAP), with support from the Agency for Integrated Management of Rural Fires (AGIF) therefore sponsored a strategic analysis ofthe planned aviation capacity for the Integrated Management System of Rural Fires in Portugal. The analysis principally focussed onthe period beyond 2025. The strategic analysis project undertook an inventory ofthe aerial firefighting resources that were available in Portugal during the different fire risk periods (Phases) for 2022, touse asa reference point (“baseline”) against which plans for future years could be compared. During the peak summer fire season (Phase IV) of 2022, principal aerial firefighting means that were immediately available tobe deployed were: Primary Role SLA* Total HEBL Light firebombing helicopter with 5 firefighters ATI3 233 29 HEBM Medium firebombing helicopter with 8-12 firefighters ATA and ATI12 12 HEBP Heavy firebombing helicopter ATA3 3 AVBM Medium firebombing aeroplane ATA and ATI14 14 AVBP Heavy firebombing aeroplane ATA2 2 HERAC Light reconnaissance and coordination helicopter 11 AVRAC Light reconnaissance aeroplane 22 TOTAL (including AFOCELCA) 456 363 *S=State-owned; L=Leased; A=Leased by AFOCELCA These primary resources are complemented by UAVs (drones) used for surveillance and, in emergencies, canbe supplemented by other FAP means orby resources from other countries. The main trends planned tobe implemented for future seasons, subject to availability and subject to prevailing market and financial considerations are: • increase the number of HEBL and AVBM, to further strengthen the initial attack system • commission upto six FAP owned and operated medium-heavy helicopters (UH-60A Black Hawks)
• decrease the number of leased HEBM, tobe offset bythe increased number of more cost-effective HEBL, andby the introduction ofFAP owned and operated medium- heavy helicopters • retire two piston-engined, leased AVBP in favour of turbine-engined aeroplanes • commission two FAP owned and operated AVBP in partnership with the RescEU program • increase the number of HERAC, initially toa total oftwo. In addition, business cases are currently being prepared or considered for: • commissioning additional FAP-owned and operated medium-heavy helicopters; and • commissioning additional FAP-owned and operated AVBP. The strategic analysis project concluded that the current and planned aerial firefighting capacity in Portugal, is generally fit-for-purpose andis appropriate tothe present and forecast situation (provided that itcan be successfully implemented in current and future markets), but there are opportunities to consider some further improvements and adjustments. A significant proportion of Portugal’s aerial firefighting capacity is dedicated to rapid initial attack of incipient fires. This is appropriate, and the initial attack organisation is world-class. Prioritising allocation of resources to effective initial attack should continue. Some refinements tothe initial attack system are recommended, especially to improve options to increase weight- of-attack in initial response. Potential future gaps in planned capability mainly centre around (i) providing sufficient weight- of-attack in initial attack and extended attack; and (ii) accessing suitable aerial resources for aerial attack on large fires and intense fires; and (iii) ensuring sufficient suitable platforms for airborne co-ordination. The analysis recommends further evaluating the costs and benefits of various options for engaging larger capacity aircraft, such as fixed-wing airtankers and heavy helicopters. Enhancing specialist capabilities such as those used for airborne surveillance and information gathering is also recommended. The project identified some risks tothe provision of aerial firefighting capabilities, particularly over the next three to five years, which is essentially a period of transition tothe planned long- term arrangements. Some of these risks are associated with current aviation market conditions; some relate to potential delays in fully commissioning planned new capabilities. Individually, these risks are considered tobe manageable, butif several adverse events happened to occur concurrently, the effect on Portugal’s overall aerial firefighting capacity could be very significant. Contingency options should be considered and carefully planned. Delivery of aerial fire management in Portugal isa joint enterprise, involving several key agencies. Successful, safe, effective and efficient aerial firefighting depends entirely on inter- agency collaboration and coordination. The main agencies and institutions involved in aerial firefighting in Portugal are highly competent and have clear responsibilities. However, some enhancements to formal governance arrangements are recommended in order to minimise the risks that are inevitably associated with multi-agency enterprises andto ensure that governance remains robust inthe future. Major Recommendations include the formation ofa multi-agency governance committee or Board, and the formation ofan interagency technical committee. Strengthening of relevant formal relationships with Spain is also recommended. The project also recommends the establishment of clear Principles, and the preparation ofa National Aerial Firefighting Strategic Plan, to guide operation and further development of aerial firefighting capabilities; andto help ensure that all actors have common understanding of
strategic directions. These should bein the form of simple, straightforward publicly available documents. Itis recommended that maintaining a high standard of safety isa key guiding Principle. Importantly, the analysis identified two transformational opportunities that have the potential to significantly enhance aerial fire management in Portugal. Progressing these two initiatives is likely to generate the greatest improvements in safety, efficiency and effectiveness, and the greatest returns on investment: 1. Further development ofthe coordination and supervision (COPAR) function for aerial means at fire operations. This would include increasing the capacity for aerial supervision and routinely using airborne coordinators ina wider range of circumstances. Formal qualifications or micro-qualifications for aerial and ground coordinators would be introduced, along with increased opportunities for training and skills maintenance. Useof Computer- Based Simulation will also improve training outcomes. 2. Improving the systems for collecting, storing, using and analysing aircraft tracking and event data. High-quality data automatically collected from aircraft serves a wide range of purposes. This data will be used to streamline management of aerial resources, and improve accountability. Inthe future, the data will underpin economic analysis and empirical resource allocation tools, and will be critical to robust evaluation of effectiveness. The strategic analysis also recommends the initiation ofa long-term economic study to closely evaluate and quantify the benefits and costs of using aerial means. Outcomes ofan economic study will greatly assist future resource allocation decisions, and decisions regarding the overall level of investment in aerial means. Finding 1 (Principal finding): Aerial fire management arrangements in Portugal are generally sound, and heading inthe right direction. Broadly speaking, the current and planned aerial firefighting capacity in Portugal isfit-for- purpose andis generally appropriate tothe present and forecast situation. However, there are opportunities to consider some improvements and adjustments. There are also risks tothe continued or planned provision of some capabilities inthe short to medium term (1to 5 years).
04 Introduction 4.1 General Portugal hasa landscape and climate that is conducive to serious unplanned fires occurring inthe rural environment. Timely and effective mitigation and response is required to assure the protection of people and communities, protection of community assets and the natural environment, andto maintain economic security. Portugal also uses fire ona planned basis to manage landscape fuels and maintain the health of fire-dependent ecotypes. There is evidence that the frequency and severity of unplanned fires are likely to increase in coming years in Portugal and other European States, mainly asa result of global climate change. Fire seasons will be longer, with the potential for damaging fires to occur at times ofthe year outside ofthe customary fire season. Climate change will also increase the probability of serious fires occurring in ecosystems and vegetation types that were previously regarded as less susceptible. In some circumstances, landscape fires will be more difficult to control, with increased propensity for spotting (projection) and lower effectiveness of natural barriers such as water courses and damp forests. The climate-related issues are compounded by factors such as shifting rural population, rural abandonment and increasing forest-urban interface. The potential economic and social impacts of forest and rural fires are likely to increase. Following a series of damaging rural fire events in 2017, and recognising the escalating threat from rural fires, the Portuguese government implemented a program of legislative change and developed a National Plan for Integrated Rural Fire Management (NPIRFM) for 2020-2030. The development ofthe National Plan followed wide consultation and detailed analysis ofthe factors that were contributing to severe rural fires. The NPIRFM is enabled by national legislation through resolution bythe Council of Ministers and aims to draw onall available national capacities, including aviation, to reduce the occurrence of rural fires andto reduce the resulting damage, from an environmental, social and economic perspective in accordance with the overall Vision: Portugal protected from severe rural fires. The NPIRFM also establishes the System for the Integrated Management of Rural Fires (SGIFR). Aerial firefighting isan important component ofthe SGIFR and aerial means are critical to delivering the outcomes required bythe National Plan and its associated Strategies and Action Plans. 4.2 Aerial firefighting Portugal hasa long and proud history of using aerial means to support the management of planned and unplanned rural fires; andto provide support to firefighters and protect
communities from wildfires. Portugal also hasa strong record of innovation in aerial fire management. Aviation can play many valuable and diverse roles inthe management of rural fires. Aircraft offer speed and weight of attack that canbe crucial to preventing spread of wildfire and protecting communities, assets and the environment. Aircraft provide perspective and critical information for local communities and for the teams that are planning combat of fires. Aerial firefighting is, however, highly specialised, and requires particular skills, as well as high- quality planning, management, coordination, supervision and support in order to operate safely, effectively and efficiently. Relatively small adjustments inan aerial operation, or single factors such asthe selection of aircraft type fora particular task, can make large differences in effectiveness and efficiency. Proper integration with ground operations is imperative. Aviation canbe relatively expensive, and often hasa high profile. Ithas been observed in many countries that great care must be taken to ensure that a focus on aviation does not distract or divert funds from other activities that may have been more effective in preventing and mitigating unplanned rural and forest fires. This caution was consistently reinforced by many respondents during consultation for this strategic analysis project. Safety ofair and ground personnel isa major issue for aerial fire operations. Around the world, the safety record for aerial firefighting isfar from optimum, and Portugal has seen a number of fatal crashes and losses of airframes in recent years. Rigorous, best-practice safety and risk management is required, including specialised training. Significant advances in aerial fire management technology have been made in recent years. Good quality data isnow available andis becoming crucial to decision-making and resource allocation. Best-practice approaches to management, supervision and support of specialised aerial assets are more sophisticated and have now been well-proven. Airborne remote sensing technology and the ability to integrate sensor outputs with agency information systems has also markedly improved. Relatively new capabilities such as Remotely or Optionally Piloted Aircraft (RPA, OPAor UAVor “drones”) are having a major impact. There have also been significant improvements in training methods for personnel involved in managing and supporting aviation, with simulation technology now playing an important role. 4.3 Strategic analysis project Asthe nature of rural fires changes in coming years, demand for specialised aerial support is likely to increase. Communities will have increased expectations ofthe responsible government agencies and the aviation industry to provide appropriate capabilities andto ensure that aerial fire management adapts tothe changing circumstances, andis safe, efficient and effective. The responsible agencies are also conscious of developments that are occurring around the world in aerial firefighting andin the application of aerial means for fire and emergency management. Implementing and deploying specialised aviation requires careful, advance planning. There are often long lead-in times to make changes orto introduce new aviation capabilities. Against this background, a project was established to conduct a high-level, strategic review and analysis of Portugal’s aerial fire management capacity. The project principally aims to: 1. identify the aerial capabilities and capacity that will provide optimum support to Portugal’s firefighters and rural communities inthe future; and:
2. support and guide the responsible agencies to optimise the way in which aerial capabilities are provided and utilised. As aerial firefighting inthe rural areas isby far the major component of aerial fire management in Portugal, the strategic analysis project focusses mainly onthe aerial means that are required for supporting response to unplanned wildfires. In Portugal, aerial firefighting isa joint effort involving a number of entities, as well as private companies. In legislation, the National Emergency and Civil Protection Agency (ANEPC) is designated asthe main “user” of aerial means for firefighting. The Portuguese Air Force (FAP) is designated asthe main “provider” of airborne means for aerial firefighting. The strategic analysis project is therefore overseen jointly byFAP and ANEPC. Support and facilitation for the project is provided bythe Agency for Integrated Management of Rural Fires (AGIF). The overall purpose ofthe strategic analysis isto provide the stakeholder agencies with resources and information that will enable those agencies to develop strategies and plans to optimise Portugal’s aerial fire management capability, supporting firefighters and protecting communities. As processes are currently in place to arrange appropriate aerial capabilities in Portugal until 2025, the strategic analysis project focussed primarily on optimising aerial firefighting arrangements that will apply from 2026 and onwards. However, the project also considers some selected shorter-term issues that were identified by respondents during the information gathering phase. To support the analysis andto assist the stakeholder agencies to identify international best- practice, the project engaged an external organisation, Avtract2. Avtract has substantial international experience and expertise in utilisation of specialised aerial resources, and specifically in aerial firefighting. 4.4 Project scope With minor exceptions*, the aerial strategic analysis project only considered aerial fire management capability applicable to Continental (mainland) Portugal. The responsible entities will continue to liaise with the Administrations ofthe Autonomous Regions of Portugal regarding appropriate arrangements for the Regions. *Exceptions relate to considering the ability to provide emergency aerial support inthe Autonomous Regions when selecting appropriate aerial capabilities for Continental Portugal. 4.5 Project methodology Portugal has considerable experience and expertise in aviation management and aerial firefighting and across multiple agencies. The project drew mainly on information and expertise that already exists within the relevant agencies and institutions. The project proceeded intwo main phases: 1. an inventory of capabilities, asat the summer season of 2022, touse asa reference point or “baseline”; along with analysis of documentation of planned capabilities for 2023 and onwards; and2 ABN38 707274543 Email: admin@avtract.com2. a conventional Strengths, Gaps, Opportunities, Problems-to-solve (SGOP) analysis. Information on strengths, gaps, opportunities and problems-to-solve was gathered from a wide range of sources including via: • review of existing documentation and literature • structured interviews with stakeholders and interest groups, and • written questionnaires for selected stakeholders. As noted earlier, itwas not practicable to consult with all interested parties, however the project team was able gather information from a representative range of stakeholders. During the analysis, capabilities, resources, resourcing levels and aerial firefighting procedures were compared with relevant practices in other jurisdictions. International partners and organisations were consulted to assure that the findings and recommendations appropriately reflect best-practice. A list of agencies and organisations directly consulted is provided at Appendix 2. 4.6Key characteristics The project identified some key characteristics ofthe environment in Portugal that are important to consider when designing optimum aerial fire management arrangements. Identifying these characteristics also helps to ascertain situations where itmay be appropriate for Portugal to adopt different approaches to aerial fire management from those that are routinely applied in other jurisdictions. Important relevant characteristics of Portugal include: Geopolitical • westernmost country of Europe • bordered by Spain tothe north and east; the only land borders are with Spain • includes the Atlantic archipelagos ofthe Azores and Madeira as Autonomous Regions (note: only Continental Portugal is specifically considered in this project) • full Member ofthe European Union; active participant in RescEU. General • area: 92,212 / 89,015km2 (total / Continental Portugal) • population: 10.3 million (total, atthe 2021 census) • main language: Portuguese, with some local dialects. English, French and Spanish are common second languages, especially in tourist areas, but are not universal (see also Aviation environment, onthe next page) • very high proportion of land is privately owned (85.5% is private, 2.7% belongs tothe State, 11.8% belongs to local communities), with a high degree of ownership fragmentation • abandonment of forests and traditional agricultural practices with consequent increase in biomass and combustible material isa significant, ongoing issue • notable population shift (especially younger demographics) from rural areas to urban and urban fringe areas (based on figures to 2021) • increasing amount of wildland or forest to urban interface. Geophysical and biophysical • bordered bythe Atlantic Ocean tothe west and south
• mainland Portugal is effectively split bythe River Tagus. North ofthe Tagus is characterised by mountains rising to2.000 metres, high plateaus and deep valleys, with large areas of forest; south ofthe Tagus tends tobe flatter, with more broad-scale agriculture • significant Protected Areas, with high conservation values, but only one formal National Park (Peneda-Gerês National Park) • Protected Areas often include privately-owned land • highest proportion of forest area in Europe (38 %) • about 25% ofthe world’s natural distribution of Cork Oak (Quercus suber). Portugal provides approximately half the world’s production of cork products; these are very significant economically • significant area of softwood (mainly Pinus spp) and hardwood (mainly Eucalyptus globulus var) plantation. Plantation products are also very significant economically. Fire climate • classic Mediterranean climate with a high-temperature, summer wildfire season; although Atlantic and continental influences create local and regional effects and complicate climate and weather modelling and predictive services • fire risk periods often align with neighbouring countries, increasing competition for resources • propensity of wildfires to project embers (“spotting”) appears tobe increasing • annual period in which damaging wildfires can occur appears tobe growing. Aviation environment • full Member State of EASA, EASA regulations apply; national civil aviation regulations apply in some circumstances • flight under Visual Flight Rules is permitted • large areas of civil and military controlled airspace relative tothe size ofthe country • heavily laden vertical obstruction environment; wires pose a very significant hazard and potentially limit opportunities for low visibility and night operations. Reliable databases and maps of wires are not always readily available or comprehensive • runways for fixed-wing aircraft are mostly relatively short and/or have relatively low pavement strength; some longer runways are available but are generally used for international Regular Public Transport orare at military installations • there is generally good availability of water, compared to many countries, for hover- filling and for fixed-wing scooping. However, availability of water along the Atlantic coast cannot be assumed, dueto typical sea-state conditions • high temperatures, and high density altitudes (low air density) prevail during times of highest wildfire risk; effects of density altitude on aircraft performance need tobe considered • Portuguese language is routinely used in general aviation in Portugal; English isnot necessarily spoken. Language barriers can create some risks in operations. The need to communicate in Portuguese language may affect overall availability of experienced flight crews (as they may not have the necessary skills).
05 Governance 5.1 Enabling legislation and regulation Inany jurisdiction, itis crucial that aerial fire management is enabled by appropriate legislation and that aerial firefighting activities are appropriately authorised bythe State. In Portugal, three general areas oflaw are directly relevant: 1. law enabling the management of fires that occur inthe rural environment and providing for the useof aerial capabilities to support rural fire management; 2. law that underpins the role ofthe Portuguese Armed Forces to provide and operate aerial capability for civilian activities inthe rural environment; and3. law that governs the operation of civil aviation in Portugal. There is also a need to consider laws that may govern or affect international aviation operations. Law pertaining to management of rural fires In recent years, Portugal has comprehensively reviewed, revised and renewed the legislative framework for management of fire in rural areas. New, updated legislation governs rural fire management. In turn, this legislation, alongside relevant Resolutions ofthe Council of Ministers, sets out responsibilities ofthe various agencies and institutions and enables the production of approved plans and strategies for management of rural fire, most notably the National Plan for Integrated Rural Fire Management (NPIRFM). The NPIRFM specifically refers toand authorises the appropriate useof aerial capabilities to support rural fire management as part ofan integrated approach – the Integrated Management System for Rural Fires (SGIFR). The project did not identify any specific issues or gaps inthe overall enabling legislation and regulations that authorise the use of aerial capabilities to support management of rural fires in Portugal. Law relating tothe role of Portuguese Armed Forces The NPIRFM specifically assigns responsibilities for some aspects of aerial firefighting to Portuguese Armed Forces. These responsibilities are mostly delivered bythe Portuguese Air Force (FAP) and exercised through: Finding 2: In general terms, useof aerial capabilities to support management of rural fires in Portugal is appropriately authorised bythe State andis enabled by appropriate, modern legislation, resolutions and regulations.
i. provision ofthe services of aircraft that are owned and operated byFAP, including un- crewed aircraft (UAVs or “drones”); ii. provision ofthe services of aircraft that are owned bythe Portuguese State and operated bythe FAP (note: itis understood that ownership of relevant aircraft previously owned by other State agencies has now been transferred toFAP, or will soon be transferred); iii. procurement and management ofthe services of civilian organisations to operate aircraft that are owned bythe Portuguese State orFAP; andiv. procurement and management ofthe services of civilian organisations to provide and operate aerial capabilities. Itis worth noting that, inthe past, various other countries have identified issues with laws that may authorise their armed forces to become involved in civil fire management. The legislation that enables and empowers the Portuguese Armed Forces, and the FAP specifically, is complex, and has been subject to various amendments over time. Itwas considered beyond the scope ofthe strategic analysis project to comprehensively analyse this legislation. A brief examination did not identify any aspects ofthe legislation that would clearly conflict with the objectives of supporting civil fire management, standing-up aerial capabilities specifically for rural fire management orof procuring and utilising civilian aviation services for the purpose of rural fire management. Law pertaining to civil aviation in Portugal Portugal isa full Member State ofthe European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA). In simple terms, civil aviation in Portugal is therefore principally governed by European civil aviation laws administered by EASA. However, in some circumstances and for certain operations, Portuguese national civil aviation legislation and regulations may apply. Portuguese civil aviation legislation is administered bythe Portuguese Civil Aviation Authority, or Autoridade Nacional de Aviação Civil (ANAC). Asan example, the operation of dropping of water by civilian aircraft is still governed, at least in-part, by Portuguese civil aviation regulations, whereas EASA regulations cover activities such as high-level aerial surveillance and mapping of wildfires. Itis also worth noting that aviation accidents are investigated bythe Agency for the Prevention and Investigation of Aircraft and Railway Accidents, or Gabinete de Prevenção e Investigação Finding 3: The project was not made aware ofany aspect ofthe legislation that establishes and empowers the Portuguese Armed Forces, and specifically the Portuguese Air Force, that conflicts with the current roles in supporting rural fire management. Observation 1: Although no obvious issues regarding the provision of support for rural fire management were identified in legislation that establishes and empowers the Portuguese Armed Forces, it would be worthwhile fora suitable expert to comprehensively examine the relevant legislation to “double-check” that it contains appropriate and unambiguous provisions (assuming such an examination has not already been recently performed).
de Acidentes com Aeronaves ede Acidentes Ferroviários (GPIAAF), while navigation and air traffic services are provided by Navegação Aérea Portugal (NAV). Further, it should be noted that aircraft owned and operated byFAP for firefighting are regarded as military aircraft and are generally not subject to civil aviation regulations. The fact that EASA regulations are applicable to some aerial firefighting activities, while Portuguese civil aviation regulations are applicable to other activities isnot necessarily an inherent problem. Mostly itis the responsibility ofAir Operators tobe aware ofthe regulations that apply tothe operations that they are conducting andto comply accordingly. Also, ANAC acts asa delegate of EASA within Portugal. However several respondents did raise the potential for confusion about which regulations applied in some circumstances, and also the potential for inconsistent standards to apply to different types of operation. One example that was raised by several respondents was the possibility of differing requirements around aircrew language skills for different operations. International operations Asthe threats posed by landscape fire increase, there is likely tobe an increase in demand for international sharing of aviation reources, either to provide immediate short-term assistance in emergency situations, oras part of longer term bi-lateral or multi-lateral mutual support and partnership arrangements. In-principle, sharing of high-cost, specialised aerial resources through international collaborative arrangements is sensible. It provides economic efficiencies and added protection for communities. Aerial resources are often the first or only choice to provide additional support for neighbouring countries in developing emergency situations. Europe is, in many ways, ideally positioned for effective sharing of aerial firefighting resources. Potentially this may involve: Recommendation 1: ANEPC, FAP and ANAC establish a formal, joint aerial fire management liaison committee, with regular scheduled meetings, with a formal agenda andan action register. Note: the recommended liaison committee could bea sub-committee ofthe Strategic Coordination Committee or Board recommended in Section 5.3of this report. Observation 2: EASA regulations apply to some aspects of civil aerial firefighting operations in Portugal, whilst Portuguese national civil aviation regulations apply to other aspects. This isnot necessarily an inherent problem, but does increase the risk of confusion about which specific regulations may apply in some circumstances, and may increase the risk of having inconsistent standards for different aerial operations. Multiple sources of regulations may also complicate contract management audit and due diligence. ANAC isthe agency that is best positioned to provide advice onthe civil aviation regulatory environment asit applies in Portugal atany point in time. ANEPC and FAP do currently maintain active liaison with ANAC regarding aviation legislation and regulations and other related matters, and have progressively developed an ongoing working relationship. There would nowbe benefit in formalising this partnership, with scheduled meetings anda register of issues and actions.
i. Portuguese-based civil aircraft operating in other countries ii. Portuguese military aircraft operating in other countries iii. foreign civil aircraft, from EASA and non-EASA Member States, operating in Portugal iv. foreign military aircraft operating in Portugal. The regulatory situation for international aviation operations is complex. Great care must be taken to ensure that the operation of Portuguese aircraft in other countries isin accordance with applicable Portuguese, EUand foreign laws; likewise great care must be taken to assure that operation ofany foreign civil or military aircraft in Portugal isin accordance with applicable laws. Tobe clear, there isno suggestion that this has not been the case inthe past. However, the aviation regulatory environment is increasingly complex and dynamic, and exercising appropriate due diligence is therefore increasingly important. 5.2 Clear accountabilities and responsibilities Akey requirement for safe, effective and efficient aerial firefighting inany jurisdiction isto ensure that the responsibilities and accountabilities ofall agencies and institutions involved are completely clear. As aerial firefighting in Portugal isa true multi-agency enterprise, this is particularly important. Portugal is currently inthe fortunate position of having recently reviewed and revised the principal legislation governing rural fire management. This legislation enables the NPIRFM and SGIFR. The NPIRM sets out specific responsibilities for the respective SGIFR agencies and institutions.3The critical responsibilities directly related to aerial fire management maybe summarised as: Entity Summarised key responsibility Armed Forces (through FAP) Provide and manage appropriate aerial support resources ANEPC as Coordinating Entity Utilise aerial support resources for response and recovery GNR (mainly through GIPS) Utilise aerial support resources for surveillance (fire detection) Put simply, FAPis the key supplier of aerial resources, ANEPC isthe key user of aerial resources; and GNR has some specific responsibilities for use of aerial resources for fire detection. 3 National Plan for Integrated Rural Fire Management 2020-2030, published by AGIF and approved by Resolution ofthe Council of Ministers 45A/2020 16 June 2020; page 82and summarised on pages 42-44 Observation 3: International aerial firefighting operations pose increased risks around regulatory compliance. Great care should be taken to ensure that any international operations are conducted in accordance with relevant laws.
ANEPC, FAP and GNR, along with other SGIFR entities, also have other relevant supporting and consulting roles. These are fully described inthe NPIRFM. Other relevant primary responsibilities to highlight include: Entity Summarised responsibility ANEPC as Coordinating Entity Pre-position aerial support resources at national and regional level according to fire risk and priorities ANEPC as Coordinating Entity Request logistics support (pre-response and response) ANEPC as Coordinating Entity Dispatch (and release) local, regional and national resources to Initial Attack and Extended Attack ANEPC as Coordinating Entity Assign missions to aerial support crews ANEPC as Coordinating Entity Monitor the progress and behaviour ofthe fire ANEPC as Coordinating Entity Request additional resources, including international (foreign) resources The allocation of fundamental responsibilities for key aerial firefighting functions toFAP, ANEPC and GNR is clear and well documented. The allocation of agency responsibilities has been reviewed relatively recently, through the post-2017 process of examining all rural fire management legislation and arrangements in Portugal, and the development ofthe NPIRFM for 2020-2030. It would be fair tosay that while not all respondents agreed with the current arrangements, the project did not identify any compelling reasons to reconsider the allocation of responsibilities inthe short to medium term. Asa matter of good governance, the allocation of fundamental responsibilities related to aerial fire management should be reviewed at regular intervals inthe future. This regular review could bea function ofthe proposed Strategic Coordination Committee or Board as recommended in Section 5.3of this report. Most importantly, although the responsibilities and accountabilities ofthe relevant agencies are currently clearly allocated and well documented, they are not always fully understood by secondary agencies and other actors (including some Air Operators) and the public. There would bea benefit in producing a simple, publicly available guide orweb-page that summarised and described the main responsibilities. This summary could also form part ofa published National Aerial Firefighting Strategic Plan, as described in Section 6.2of this report. Finding 4: The key responsibilities and accountabilities ofthe relevant agencies and institutions in relation to aerial firefighting are appropriate and clearly defined inthe relevant legislation and underpinning strategies and plans, but are not always understood by other actors and the public.
5.3 Inter-agency coordination and collaboration Asin many countries, aerial fire management in Portugal isa joint enterprise. There are many agencies and institutions involved, and many stakeholders. Successful delivery of aerial support for firefighting relies on effective, high-level inter-agency collaboration, co-operation and communication. Efficient, collaborative forward planning and strategic decision-making is also required, along with clear, consistent guidance and priority setting for agency staff who are assigned to implement aerial firefighting programs. There is also a fundamental need inany joint enterprise to ensure that all agencies involved, whether they arein Coordinating, Responsible Entity or Support Entity roles, are working toa setof agreed common principles, plans, goals and priorities. Tobe completely clear, any suggestions regarding overall governance and inter-agency coordination in this section are intended to cover only high-level, joint enterprise management and planning; it would be inappropriate for high-level inter-agency coordination arrangements to have any direct role in operational coordination, control or command of aerial resources during actual wildfire events. Collaboration between the main agencies involved in aerial firefighting in Portugal is generally good at management level. However, although this is working well atthe moment, it relies to some degree on existing relationships and there areno readily identifiable formal structures for ongoing collaboration. This situation presents potential future risks, particularly if there are changes to organisational structures orkey personnel. Risks would be reduced by formalising some aspects of interagency collaboration and cooperation. The project carefully considered whether there wasa need fora formal interagency governance and coordination mechanisms specifically for aerial means, or whether this should be accommodated within other high-level national governance arrangements. On balance, itwas concluded that arrangements specifically for aerial means were justified, considering factors such as: Recommendation 2: A simple, publicly available, summary guide tothe main current responsibilities and accountabilities related to aerial firefighting in Portugal should be produced and published. Note: this guide could form part ofa wider National Aerial Firefighting Strategic Plan. ANEPC advises that publication ofthe textbook: Aerial Means in Rural Fire Fighting inthe near future will assist in educating other parties. ANEPC also proposes that a simple flowchart with the attributions ofthe different actors be placed on ANEPC's website. This can then be linked from, or reproduced on, other websites. Observation 4: The key responsibilities and accountabilities ofthe relevant agencies and institutions in relation to aerial firefighting should ideally be regularly reviewed inthe future. Note: future review of agency and institutional responsibilities in relation to aerial firefighting could bea function ofa Strategic Coordination Committee or Board or equivalent governance arrangement.
• multiple, large agencies and institutions involved • multiple stakeholders, including international stakeholders and the EU • complexity ofthe regulatory environment • significant operational risks and requirements for specialist risk management • high public profile and increasing public expectations • very significant public expenditure. Itis worth noting that ithas been found in many other countries that formal coordination mechanisms, such as inter-agency coordination committees and technical committees often significantly improve collaboration and communication by simply enhancing working relationships between the respective agencies and institutions. High-level, strategic coordination and collaboration Formal, high-level inter-agency governance and coordination committees are normal practice in countries where successful delivery of aerial capabilities depends on multiple agencies with differing responsibilities. Some countries have adopted the concept ofa “Board” to provide high-level governance for jointly-delivered aerial fire management in their jurisdiction, andto provide a formal avenue for ongoing collaboration and cooperation. The Governance Board model has some important characteristics that are useful in joint enterprises. Notably, although the members ofthe governing Board ofa multi-agency enterprise maybe nominated byan individual agency, they donot necessarily represent the interests of that agency, but have a responsibility toact inthe best interests ofthe enterprise overall. This “Board concept” has been found to work well, in other countries, for governance of joint enterprises such as multi-agency aerial capability. Typically, a high-level, inter-agency governance arrangement such asa Coordinating Committee or Board would, for example: • provide a formal, quality-assured mechanism for communication between relevant agencies on high-level strategic matters, planning and other issues relating to aerial capability • agree on underlying Principles for utilising aerial capabilities to support rural fire management • agree on strategic directions for aerial capability and ensure that appropriate, agreed plans for future capability are developed • maintain, approve and publish the “National Aerial Firefighting Strategic Plan” (see Section 6.2) or equivalent document • agree on high-level priorities for the joint enterprise • provide advice to government and key stakeholder agencies regarding priorities and funding • identify needs for strategic research and monitor progress of research • periodically review agency responsibilities and accountabilities and provide advice to government • establish and oversee sub-committees on technical and operational matters. A high-level Strategic Coordinating Committee or Board would typically: • include senior nominees from all relevant agencies and institutes
• meet regularly, with a formal agenda, and maintain registers of issues and agreed actions Technical coordination and collaboration In aerial fire management itis also crucial that all actors work to common, agreed technical standards and operational procedures. Standards for training of personnel who supervise and support aerial operations should also be aligned. In Portugal, multiple entities have an interest in technical standards, operational standards and training standards relating to aerial operations. Again, while interagency collaboration is generally good regarding these matters, there would be benefit in establishing a formal, ongoing structure for interagency communication and collaboration on technical and operational matters and procedures. Most countries with multiple agencies involved in delivering specialised aerial capabilities establish a formal inter-agency Technical Committee or similar group. In many instances, this Technical Committee isa sub-committee ofthe high-level Coordinating Committee or Board or equivalent referred to above. A typical example would: • identify needs for common technical standards, procedures and training standards • coordinate or arrange the development of agreed, common technical standards, procedures and training standards • agree on common, inter-agency technical standards, procedures and training standards • advise the high-level Coordinating Committee or Board regarding priorities for development of standards and procedures • provide technical advice tothe high-level Coordinating Committee or Board, andto key stakeholder agencies. A Technical Committee would typically: • include senior technical experts from the relevant agencies • meet regularly, with a formal agenda; with formal meetings supplemented by additional informal and subject-specific meetings; and maintain a register of agreed actions. Recommendation 3: Establish a formal, high-level, interagency Aerial Means Strategic Coordination Committee or Board to provide overall governance ofthe joint, multi-agency enterprise that delivers and deploys aerial capabilities to support rural fire management in Portugal. Note: itis suggested that: oa Strategic Coordination Committee or Board should have clearly defined, agreed Terms of Reference that set out, ata minimum: − roles ofthe Committee − scope of operation − membership, and responsibilities of members − meeting procedures [continues on next page]
5.4 International collaboration - Spain Spain, including the Autonomous Regions of Spain, isa critical partner in aerial fire management in Portugal. Whilst also acknowledging the importance ofEU coordinating mechanisms, such asthe Civil Protection Mechanism and its RescEU sub-program, there are some existing and potential direct relationships between Portugal and Spain that justify special attention: Recommendation 4: Establish a formal interagency Technical Committee for aerial capabilities that support rural fire management. Note: itis suggested that: oa Technical Committee should have clearly defined Terms of Reference that set out, ata minimum: − roles ofthe Committee − scope of operation − membership, and responsibilities of members − meeting procedures othe Technical Committee be established asa sub-committee ofthe Strategic Coordinating Committee or Board, and provide regular progress reports othe Technical Committee should meet at least four times per year, with a formal agenda, and should maintain a register of issues anda register of agreed actions othe Technical Committee would logically be convened by either ANEPC orFAP (possibly in rotation) and include, ata minimum, nominees of ANEPC, ANEPC- FEPC, FAP and GNR-GIPS, and appropriate representation of Fire Brigades. Involvement of representatives of other relevant government and non- government institutions should also be considered o development of agreed standards for training of personnel who manage, supervise and support aerial capabilities could be included inthe responsibilities ofthe Technical Committee, orit maybe preferred that a separate mechanism be established for this purpose. [Recommendation 3 continued] oa Strategic Coordinating Committee or Board should meet at least four times per year, with a formal agenda, and should maintain a register of issues anda register of agreed actions oa high-level Strategic Coordination Committee or Board would logically be convened by AGIF, with membership from ANEPC, FAP, GNR, and appropriate representation of Fire Brigades. Involvement of representatives of ANAC, MDN and other government institutions, such as ICNF, should also be considered o appropriate non-government institutions such as AFOCELCA could be observers, or could participate in relevant sub-committees.
• the entirety of mainland Portugal’s land border is with Spain (the longest continuous land border between two countries inthe EU) • there isan existing, bi-lateral agreement for provision of mutual support inthe land border zone (25km either side ofthe land border). This agreement needs tobe closely managed and monitored, dueto the significant safety and legal implications • Spain isthe country most likely tobe a supplier of surge aerial resources for Portugal when additional capacity is required inan emergency; and vice-versa. Sharing of aerial resources between Portugal and Spain is likely to occur more often inthe future. Itis important that mechanisms for sharing of resources are carefully pre- planned. Ideally the arrangements, including agreed operational procedures, should be formalised ina bi-lateral agreement • there are potential opportunities to partner with Spain, inthe future, for routine or “mainstream”, joint provision of specialised aerial firefighting resources. Asa simple example, Portugal and Spain could possibly collaborate to routinely share high-cost resources such as large fixed-wing airtankers or heavy helicopters • there will be significant benefits in aligning technical standards for aviation activities between Portugal and Spain, where this is appropriate and practical. Common or closely aligned standards and operating procedures underpin the ability to safely and successfully share resources; and generate efficiencies in other areas – such as safety management, data collection and contract management, and training. • there are significant opportunities to closely collaborate with Spanish agencies institutions on matters such as training initiatives. Aligning training in aviation ICS roles has the potential to generate significant benefits. Whilst good communication and collaboration with appropriate Spanish agencies and institutions does currently occur, and there are already a number of joint initiatives, there are also some gaps. Asan example, the formal Portugal-Spain land border mutual support agreement has been recently revised, with some significant changes, however many respondents reported that they were not aware of some ofthe more important changes. Many respondents considered that there would be considerable benefit in further formalising the Portugal-Spain collaborative partnership arrangements regarding aerial fire management. Collaboration needs to occur at different levels, ranging from strategic to technical. Itis suggested that a high-level, international oversight committee be established to coordinate collaboration between Portugal and Spain regarding aerial fire management. This Portugal- Spain oversight committee should: • consider drafting and approving a simple, agreed Charter or similar document, committing Spain and Portugal to collaboration, cooperation and communication regarding aerial fire management, and describing the agreed arrangements and processes • coordinate collaboration between Portugal and Spain regarding aerial fire management • monitor relevant bi-lateral agreements, identify requirements or opportunities for new agreements, or requirements for revisions to existing agreements • identify and consider opportunities for further bi-lateral sharing of resources between Portugal and Spain, including the possibility of routine or “mainstream” provision of shared specialised resources
• identify and consider other opportunities for enhancing collaboration between Portugal and Spain, particularly in activities such as training for aviation-related ICS roles and associated micro-qualifications • identify other areas of collaboration requiring attention, and prioritise development of solutions • elevate matters to appropriate EU coordination mechanisms when required • ensure that coordination processes and agreements are communicated as required • establish and oversee joint sub-committees or working groups as required, for example: on technical and operational matters. A Portugal-Spain collaboration oversight committee would: • comprise appropriate high-level representatives of relevant agencies and institutions from Portugal and Spain • hold regular meetings, at least twice per year, with a formal agenda • maintain an agreed action plan. Tobe clear, any suggestions regarding overall governance and coordination of international collaboration in this section are intended to only cover activities such as strategic management, planning and preparation, and development of joint initiatives. While itis not uncommon for management of international operational activities tobe enhanced through the working relationships that are established asa result of collaborative mechanisms, it would be inappropriate for the proposed collaboration oversight arrangements to have any direct role in operational coordination, control or command or directing the sharing of aerial resources during actual wildfire events or emergencies. These operational roles are covered by other mechanisms. Observation 5: Many respondents indicated that they were not aware of some important aspects ofthe current land border mutual support agreement between Portugal and Spain, following the most recent revisions. For example, many respondents were not aware that the agreement now applies within 25km ofthe border. Note: This issue is also included inthe Supplementary Report on Technical and Operational matters (refer to Appendix 1). Observation 6: Some respondents also expressed concern regarding aspects ofthe land border mutual support agreement between Portugal and Spain. Most concerns related to different operational procedures, especially communication procedures, that applied along sections ofthe border, associated with differing requirements ofthe respective adjacent Autonomous Regions of Spain. Note: itis understood that Spanish national authorities are aware this matter, and have initiated a project to align procedures where appropriate. This issue is also included inthe Supplementary Report on Technical and Operational matters (refer to Appendix 1).
44 Guidance onthe format and content ofbi-lateral agreements for international sharing of aviation resources is provided at http://www.ifawg.net/ifawg-fire-aviation-guidelines-part-2-new/co-7-1-international-deployments/ Recommendation 5: That Portugal proposes tothe appropriate agencies or institutions in Spain that a formal arrangement, such asa high-level oversight committee, be convened to govern, coordinate and promote collaboration regarding aerial fire management between Portugal and Spain. Note: itis suggested that: oA collaboration oversight committee should have clearly defined Terms of Reference that set out, ata minimum: − roles ofthe Committee − scope of operation − membership, and responsibilities of members − meeting procedures othe Committee should meet at least twice per year, with a formal agenda; and should maintain a register of issues anda register of agreed actions othe Committee would logically be convened by AGIF and MITECO (possibly in rotation) and include, ata minimum, nominees of ANEPC, FAP and appropriate Spanish agencies and institutions. Involvement of representatives of other government and non-government institutions should also be considered. Recommendation 6: Consideration be given tothe possibility of entering into a consolidated, comprehensive bi- lateral agreement with Spain for routine sharing of aerial resources for between Portugal and Spain, for fire and emergency management purposes. This bi-lateral agreement would be intended to provide for situations that are not covered bythe existing 25km land border mutual support agreement. Note: Itis acknowledged that abi-lateral agreement may not be necessary if wider EU resource sharing procedures and standards are sufficiently comprehensive inthe future. However, itis considered that there would be value in establishing a consolidated PT-ESbi-lateral agreement inthe meantime. Itis critical for safety inbi-lateral resource sharing that appropriate, clear operational procedures are agreed and published.4Any bi-lateral agreement should include agreed operational procedures.
06 National strategy 6.1 Guiding principles A strategic approach to aerial resource management inany jurisdiction is normally based on some form of established guiding principles. These underpinning principles then provide consistent direction for the selection of appropriate capabilities and for development of appropriate doctrine such as plans, strategies, training programs and Operational Directives. Agreed, cross-agency guiding principles are effectively imperative ina multi-agency enterprise such as aerial fire management in Portugal. The main principles underpinning aerial fire management in Portugal are generally already agreed and understood between the main agencies and institutions. However, there would be additional benefit in formalising and publishing these implied principles. Asan example, oneof the key principles guiding the development of aerial firefighting capability in Portugal is clearly that rapid initial attack of nascent fires isa primary focus. This principle has guided the development ofthe aerial firefighting fleet towards higher numbers of smaller, more responsive air attack aircraft, that are well spaced around the country during high fire risk periods. This isa logical and sensible approach, butit would be useful to clearly document and publish this principle so that all agencies and their personnel, and the aviation industry, understand the factors that are driving the selection of capabilities. Ina multi-agency environment, the actual process of defining and agreeing on guiding principles is also very valuable, and will improve shared understanding ofthe factors that each partner agency needs to consider in delivering their responsibilities. Agreed principles would ideally also form part ofthe published National Aerial Firefighting Strategic Plan that is recommended at Section 6.2. Itis important that Portugal develop and agree its own underpinning principles for aerial fire management, although itis suggested that the principle of prioritising safety should be always bethe first guiding principle for any jurisdiction. The following are illustrative examples of typical guiding principles that have been adapted from or adopted in other jurisdictions: • Safety onthe ground andin the air is always the highest priority • Planning and deployment of aerial capabilities will be driven bythe needs ofthe community • Rapid Initial Attack will the primary focus of aerial firefighting • Aerial operations will be fully integrated with ground operations • Financial, human and physical resources for aerial operations will be deployed ina manner that is sustainable and based on assessment of risk • Aerial capabilities will be optimised through cooperation and collaboration, including with industry partners and internationally
• Decisions regarding the application of aerial capabilities will be made onthe basis of evidence • Aerial fire management will be conducted and supported to high standards • Aerial fire management programs will incorporate continuous improvement through ongoing evaluation and review, training, research and innovation. 6.2 National Aerial Firefighting Strategic Plan Asis the case in most countries, aerial firefighting isby far the major component of aerial fire management in Portugal. As previously noted, responsibilities for aerial firefighting functions in Portugal are clearly laid outin the NPIRFM and associated plans and sub-plans, however they are not always well understood by some agencies andby some third-parties such asAir Operators, and the public. Likewise the main guiding principles that drive the selection and operation of aerial capabilities are implied and are generally understood bythe main agencies involved, but are not necessarily clearly documented or communicated to other agencies and institutions andto the aviation industry and the public. Other countries have also found that providing some guidance tothe supplier industry regarding planned future developments and directions has generated significant benefits. Long lead-in times are often required inthe aviation industry to deliver changes in aviation capability and capacity andto provide appropriate ongoing sustainment. Advance notice allows the aviation industry to plan and prepare to provide the capabilities and capacity required, andto make appropriate investments. Itis therefore suggested that the main agencies involved in aerial firefighting in Portugal, collaborate to produce and publish a simple and straightforward, agreed document that brings together and summarises: • the overall governance arrangements for aerial firefighting • the relevant components ofthe NPIRFM and SGIFR and plans and sub-plans • responsibilities ofthe main agencies and institutions regarding aerial firefighting • key principles that guide the development and operation of aerial firefighting capability • anticipated future developments and strategic directions Recommendation 7: The relevant agencies and institutions formally agree and publish the basic Principles that guide the development and operation of aerial firefighting capability in Portugal. Note: ideally the agreed, approved Principles would form part ofa wider, published National Aerial Firefighting Strategic Plan. Ideally the Principles would be drafted under the auspices ofa high-level, interagency Aerial Means Strategic Coordination Committee or Board, who would appoint one agency or institution to lead the drafting process. This governance committee would then jointly approve the agreed Principles, and arrange for periodic review.
• other factors driving capability selection and capacity and fleet planning. The document should also provide a very brief background to aerial firefighting in Portugal, describing its history and development and why itis an important component ofthe SGIFR that requires significant public investment; as well as summaries of current and planned capabilities. Itis also suggested that the document clearly emphasise that the following doctrine underpins fleet selection and operation in mainland Portugal: • the primary considerations for aerial firefighting fleet selection in Portugal are: o only capabilities that can operate safely and legally will be selected o ensuring effective rapid initial attack toany part of Portugal or community that is threatened by landscape fire; ando ensuring that there is access to sufficient, appropriate aerial means to support extended attack and response to large fires. The proposed document is referred to here for convenience asa “National Aerial Firefighting Strategic Plan”, but the relevant agencies may prefer an alternative title. The National Aerial Firefighting Strategic Plan, if adopted, should be regularly reviewed. Recommendation 8: The main agencies involved in aerial firefighting in Portugal collaborate to produce and publish a brief, straightforward “National Aerial Firefighting Strategic Plan” or equivalent document. Ideally the Strategic Plan would be drafted under the auspices ofa high-level, interagency Aerial Means Strategic Coordination Committee or Board, who would appoint one agency or institution to lead the drafting process. This governance committee would then jointly approve the Plan, and arrange for periodic review.
07 Operational command, coordination and supervision 7.1 National aircraft coordination and support Useof aerial resources is inevitably high-profile and can be expensive. Effective, specialised high-level coordination and command protocols are required. Careful planning is required to ensure appropriate operational readiness ata national level, andto use aerial resources efficiently. Aviation also involves certain risks that require active and specialised management. Rural fire and emergency response operations in Portugal are coordinated from the National Emergency and Civil Protection Command (CNEPC) Centre which is physically located inthe ANEPC Headquarters at Carnaxide, Lisbon. In simple terms, the CNEPC commands the resources ofthe Special Rural Fire Fighting Device (DECIR) which isin-effect the pooled resources ofall participating agencies and institutions. The DECIR includes all relevant aerial resources, including those made available by organisations such as AFOCELCA. The Command system is detailed ina series of Operational Directives issued bythe National Emergency and Civil Protection Commander, in particular Diretiva Operacional Nacional n.º2 (DONNo. 2 – DECIR). Ona daily basis, operational decisions regarding national deployment of resources, including aerial resources, are made bya rostered delegate ofthe National Emergency and Civil Protection Commander. The rostered delegate is normally a Deputy Commander. Recent changes (January 2023) in ANEPC organisational structure have seen some delegation of coordination and command responsibilities to regional orsub-regional centres. Itis understood that this will generally not affect high-level coordination and command of aerial resources, at least inthe short term. Most respondents agreed that itis important that CNEPC maintains a national picture ofthe situation of aerial means and that aerial resources should continue tobe considered as national resources and strategically coordinated from the national CNEPC Centre. Observation 7: Most respondents reinforced that aerial resources should be considered as national resources and continue tobe strategically coordinated nationally. Note: this isnot intended to mean that ATI resources could notbe dispatched or commanded by regional orsub-regional Commands.
The permanent ANEPC Cell that is responsible for general management of aerial means for civil protection is also located inthe Carnaxide building. Itis worth noting that ithas been observed in many countries that co-location ofthe permanent management cell for aerial means with the operational coordination and command centre (which usually also includes a resource dispatch function) can have advantages and dis- advantages. Co-location means that the command centre has ready access to expert advice. Onthe other hand, ifthe management cell is constantly required to support urgent operational situations, personnel canbe distracted from delivering important ongoing management functions that are necessary to ensure reliable and timely availability of aerial means. Normally these issues are managed by: i. ensuring that there isa clear separation of functions and duties between the management cell and the operational command; andii. ensuring that the operational command function has guaranteed access to sufficient and appropriate aviation expertise ona rostered basis. National operational coordination and readiness In Portugal, key operational command and coordination functions that need tobe performed by CNEPC in relation to aerial means include: • maintaining overall national situational awareness of aerial means • providing briefings and situation reports tothe chain-of-command • assessing medium-term national weather and fire danger forecasts (say3 to7 days in advance) and making decisions about readiness of resources and engagement of additional resources, or reducing resources, to match the forecast situation • assessing the overall demand for aerial assets ona daily basis and making appropriate adjustments tothe numbers and types of aircraft that are available and where they are located • repositioning aerial resources in accordance with fire activity and forecast activity, including moving resources between CMA’sand districts to meet operational needs and forecast risks • assessing and prioritising requests for aerial resources • approving Armed Air Monitoring (Monitorização Aérea Armada orMAA) patrol when required • approving orpre-approving dispatch ofATA resources toATI situations • approving orpre-approving retention ofATI resources at fires that have extended into ATA • monitoring support systems (for example: the status of CMAs) and making adjustments tothe positioning of aircraft as required • providing advice to regional and local commanders, and incident commander regarding optimal useof air means • liaising with other agencies and institutions as required • managing aircraft emergency situations that may arise • activating and coordinating international assistance when required.
Clearly, optimal performance of these functions requires a detailed understanding ofthe applications and limitations of different types of aerial resources; andof the requirements for effective management, coordination and support. Itis crucial that access to appropriate expertise is available. There would be advantages in further formalising and streamlining the provision of expert operational aerial firefighting support to CNEPC and ensuring that sufficient expert support is available atall times. Many countries with a similar scope of aerial firefighting operations to Portugal establish a National Aircraft Coordinator (NAC) or equivalent position inthe central command centre to support their national command. The NAC position is usually staffed ona rostered basis by appropriately qualified personnel with aviation expertise. Often the staff who fill the rostered NAC position will be sourced from the aerial means management cell, but the roster could include suitably qualified expert personnel from other units or agencies, for example: FEPC, GIPS orFAP. Itis beyond the scope of this study to provide detailed advice on CNEPC structures and resourcing, butit is suggested that ANEPC consider whether itis appropriate to formally designate a rostered NACor equivalent role. National operational support Where a national command centre has responsibility for receiving requests for air means and for dispatching and actively monitoring aerial resources, itis usual to also establish an aerial means support function. Often this is referred toas a National Air Dispatch Centre ora national “AirDesk” or equivalent, andis staffed by specially trained, rostered operators. Key roles ofthe aerial means support function usually include: • managing and providing data and information to support the CNEPC and its operational command and coordination function for air means as outlined above • dispatching national aircraft • dispatching support resources • providing flight-following (real-time monitoring for safety purposes) for national aircraft • monitoring national availability of specialist personnel for supporting and supervising aerial operations and making adjustments tothe availability and location of personnel as required • monitoring aerial firefighting activities to ensure that resources are released back to their home CMA when no longer required • supporting management of aircraft emergency situations. Whether ornot a formal AirDesk or equivalent is established, itis crucial to ensure that sufficient fully trained personnel are always available to perform aviation support functions inthe command centre, including receiving requests and dispatching and flight following for aerial resources. There is also a need to ensure access to surge personnel, that is trained personnel who can attend at short notice to supplement rostered personnel when there are unusually high levels of activity. Again, itis beyond the scope of this study to provide detailed advice on command centre structures and resourcing, butit is also suggested that ANEPC consider the whether itis appropriate to adopt a defined “AirDesk” to consolidate aerial support functions inthe CNEPC Centre.
7.2 Aerial coordination and supervision A transformational opportunity High quality on-site operational coordination and supervision of aerial firefighting at fire situations is crucial to success. This has been evidenced by experience over many years in many countries around the world. These countries have consistently found that implementing high-standard operational coordination and supervision of aircraft has resulted inthe greatest improvements in safety, effectiveness and efficiency of aerial firefighting. Almost all jurisdictions that routinely use aerial firefighting now define a role to actively co-coordinate and supervise air operations at emergency incidents. This aerial supervision role is normally included in each country’s version ofthe Incident Command System (ICS), andis referred toas, for example: Air Attack Supervisor, Air Attack Officer, Air Coordinator orAir Tactical Group Supervisor. There can some confusion in terminology used to refer to coordination and supervision in fire and emergency management around the world. In part this isdue tothe fact that, in aerial firefighting, an aerial supervisor or coordinator role normally encompasses some elements of both operational coordination and supervision of aircraft. Tobe clear, the role does not extend toair traffic control (active direction of aircraft for separation purposes) although an aerial supervisor or coordinator may assist pilots in maintaining separation. Active direction of aircraft to maintain separation would require air traffic control or pilot qualifications. Key elements ofthe role normally include: • advising Incident Commanders on aerial tactics and strategy and the most appropriate useof aircraft • advising Incident Commanders onthe most appropriate type of aircraft to employ to meet incident control objectives • advising Incident Commanders when aerial resources are ineffective orno longer required • integrating aerial fire control operations with ground fire control operations • interpreting fire control objectives and developing aerial tactics to meet incident objectives • communicating aerial tactics to pilots Recommendation 9: ANEPC review organisational structures and staffing levels inthe national Command Centre to ensure that sufficient expertise in aerial means is always available to support CNEPC, and that sufficient trained, specialist staff are always available to support aviation operational functions inthe Centre. Note: itis suggested that the ANEPC review consider whether there is value in establishing a position of National Aircraft Coordinator or equivalent within the CNEPC; and/or consider consolidating aviation support positions into an AirDesk or equivalent.
• ensuring that aerial operations are efficient and effective; monitoring and adjusting operations • identifying hazards and potential safety issues; resolving safety issues where appropriate • identifying water sources • providing overall situation awareness to relevant ICS roles onthe ground, including Incident Commanders • communicating between ground crews and aircraft • assisting pilots to maintain separation of aircraft, providing advice regarding procedures to enhance separation • assessing effectiveness of aerial operations, keeping records and providing appropriate feedback and reports • verifying useof aircraft for accounting, payment and record-keeping purposes. In general terms, the role maybe performed from an airborne platform or from the ground. Although ground-based operational coordination of aerial assets is useful for relatively simple operations, airborne supervision and coordination has been found tobe most effective inthe majority of situations. Airborne coordination also provides additional benefits, such as improved overall situational awareness, obtaining incident intelligence, identifying preferred water sources and providing an additional layer of safety for ground crews and communities. The aerial supervision and coordination role requires a very good knowledge of rural fire control strategy and tactics and aerial firefighting tactics, as well as specific knowledge of aircraft and their limitations. A good understanding of relevant regulations is required. High quality communication skills are necessary. Any person undertaking the role requires significant training and must practice and maintain skills after initial qualification. Most countries require some form of qualification or micro-qualification for persons performing aerial coordination and supervision. Portugal is very much aware ofthe potential benefits of high-quality coordination and supervision for air operations andis well advanced in implementing air and ground coordination (COPAR-Arand COPAR-T[erra]) programs for aerial firefighting. A number of COPAR-Arand COPAR-T have been trained and appointed. A manual of coordination procedures, the Manual for the Coordination of Aerial Operations in Rural Fires, has been prepared by ANEPC andis dueto be published inthe near future. DON-DECIR currently prescribes that a COPAR-T should be appointed atan incident which has more than two aircraft assigned; anda COPAR-Ar should be appointed, to work with the COPAR-T, whenever four or more aircraft are operating inthe same operational theatre. These directives donot prevent COPAR being assigned to incidents with fewer aircraft involved, provided that sufficient trained COPAR are available. Most countries that regularly deploy aerial assets for firefighting now aim to have airborne coordination and supervision (that is, equivalent to COPAR-Ar) in place for all air attack operations. Exceptions may apply where the pilot-commander ofthe air attack aircraft has been specifically trained and approved forun-supervised air attack – this in turn requires a level of additional training for the aircrew similar to that required for COPAR. Most respondents strongly reinforced the value of having high-quality coordination and supervision at rural fires in Portugal. Many respondents also indicated that a significant increase in capacity for airborne coordination was required, to ensure that sufficient COPAR- Arare available.
Increasing the number of trained COPAR-Ar also requires making available additional suitable coordination aircraft. Currently COPAR-Ar mostly operate from a limited number of Agusta 119 Koala HERAC (light helicopters) provided and operated byFAP, and occasionally from AVRAC (fixed-wing reconnaissance) aircraft. For 2023, itis planned that the number of dedicated HERAC will be increased from oneto two, however additional capacity will be required as more trained COPAR-Ar become available. On occasions, it will be possible to also utilise AVRAC, or even HEBL, as coordination and supervision platforms, without compromising ATI capacity (for example: by utilising anATI resource based ina region where the fire risk islow). Some respondents considered that there appeared tobe somewhat variable standards of COPAR-T across the country. This is concerning, and poses potential safety risks. Even if COPAR-Ar capacity is increased, maintaining a high standard of COPAR-T will still be important, asit will notbe practical or sensible to allocate COPAR-Arto all incidents requiring COPAR. Continuing to improve the standard, and increasing the capacity of COPAR overall should be regarded asa transformational opportunity for Portugal, andis worthy of significant priority and effort. As previously mentioned, other countries have reported dramatic improvements in safety, effectiveness and efficiency of aerial firefighting operations by implementing high quality coordination and supervision. There are also a number of additional benefits, for example: • an effective increase in availability and capacity of aerial resources (this arises, in-part, because coordinators ensure that aircraft are released from situations when they areno longer being effective) • reduction inthe overall cost of using aerial means, asa result of improved safety, effectiveness and efficiency • greatly improved accountability for public expenditure on aerial means • increased public confidence in agencies and institutions involved in aerial firefighting. Increasing the standard and improving the capacity of COPAR will require close collaboration between key agencies, including ANEPC, FAP, GNR-GIPS, Fire brigades and AGIF, as well as with institutions such asthe National Fire Service School (ENB). Liaison with relevant Spanish andEU agencies would also be beneficial, with a view to aligning standards and procedures where appropriate, and collaborating on training. There would be considerable benefit in initiating a formal joint-agency project to manage the process of further developing Portugal’s coordination and supervision capacity for air operations. Key steps inthe project would include: • finalise appropriate, agreed standards for aerial coordination and supervision in Portugal • finalise agreed training standards for COPAR including: o requirements for formal qualifications or micro-qualifications o requirements for maintaining ongoing proficiency. • determine the numbers of COPAR-Arand COPAR-T ultimately required to ensure optimum aerial supervision and coordination in Portugal; and set appropriate targets for training and proficiency programs.
Itis important to note that most countries have experienced that there isa need achieve a balance between having appropriate numbers of qualified COPAR (or equivalent position) and those COPAR having sufficient opportunities for gaining experience and practicing skills. Recent developments inlow-cost computer-based simulation technology can assist with maintaining skills (refer to Section 9.7). • develop an agreed joint agency plan to ensure that Portugal continues to implement appropriate, best-practice aerial coordination and supervision arrangements; andto ensure that the capacity for high quality coordination and supervision ofair operations is significantly increased. It will necessarily take some years to establish appropriate standards and gradually increase the capacity for best-practice coordination and supervision. Inthe meantime, some incremental improvements canbe made. Itis suggested that immediate efforts be directed to: • increasing the availability of airborne coordinators (COPAR-Ar) and ensuring that they canbe deployed toas many incidents that involve multiple aircraft asis practical (ANEPC advises that they are currently working to increase the number of trained COPAR-Ar) • publishing the Manual for the Coordination of Aerial Operations in Rural Fires Note: refer also to Section 9.3 regarding ICS. Recommendation 10: A transformational opportunity Portugal formally commits toa high priority objective of transforming the safety, effectiveness and efficiency of aerial firefighting by: i. continuing to implement appropriate, best-practice aerial coordination and supervision arrangements; andii. increasing the capacity for high quality coordination and supervision ofair operations. Note: this commitment would logically be arranged through the formal, high-level, interagency governance arrangement such asthe Aerial Means Strategic Coordination Committee or Board recommended at Section 5.3. Observation 8: Care should be taken ifit is planned to increase the number or complexity ofair attack aircraft inthe future. The ability to provide adequate coordination and supervision for air attack operations should beone ofthe considerations in making decisions about air attack capabilities and capacity. Finding 5: Improving the capacity and standard of operational coordination and supervision of aerial means isa transformational opportunity for Portugal.
Recommendation 12: The Manual for the Coordination of Aerial Operations in Rural Fires developed by ANEPC should be published asa matter of priority. Recommendation 11: A formal joint-agency project be initiated, with the mission of: i. defining appropriate best-practice aerial coordination and supervision standards and arrangements; andii. developing agreed implementation plans. Note: the joint project would ideally be commissioned bythe high-level, interagency governance arrangement such asthe Aerial Means Strategic Coordination Committee or Board recommended at Section 5.3; and would logically beled by ANEPC with involvement from AGIF, FAP, GNR-GIPS, Fire Brigades and ENB. Recommendation 15: Pending further direction from the joint project proposed at Recommendation 11, inthe meantime Portugal should increase the number of light helicopters (and aeroplanes, if appropriate) that are available for COPAR-Ar. Note: itis suggested that a minimum of3 suitable light helicopters should be available during Phase IV. Recommendation 13: Formal qualifications or micro-qualifications and appropriate formal training courses and competency-based certification should be established for COPAR-Arand COPAR-T. Note: itis suggested that aligning training standards and qualifications with Spain, and collaborating with Spain to provide COPAR training, also be considered. Recommendation 16: Pending further direction from the joint project proposed at Recommendation11, inthe meantime, the range of situations where itis intended that COPAR-Arbe routinely deployed should be expanded, as sufficient trained and qualified COPAR-Ar become available. Note: currently a COPAR-Aris required when four or more aircraft are present inan operating theatre. Itis suggested that Portugal should ideally aimto have COPAR-Arat any situation involving multiple air attack aircraft. Recommendation 14: Training exercises and other opportunities to develop and maintain skills after initial qualification should be routinely provided for COPAR-Arand COPAR-T.
7.3 Training for users of aerial means Ithas also been found in many countries that providing appropriate training inthe proper useof aerial means toall “users” of aerial firefighting trained provides significant improvements in effectiveness and efficiency. This means that any person whois likely to occupy anICS position equivalent to crew leader, sector commander, division commander or incident commander should receive an appropriate level of training in effective useof aerial means. This training could also be extended to planning chiefs and logistics chiefs, andto district relief commanders who may be involved in dispatch or strategic coordination of aerial resources. Training does not have tobe complex or time consuming, but should include, ata level appropriate tothe trainee’s role: • basic aviation safety • basic regulatory considerations • aircraft type recognition • limitations of aerial means • appropriate tactical applications for different types of aircraft and dispensing systems • characteristics and uses of water, foam, gel and retardant • communication procedures • integrating aerial firefighting tactics and strategy with ground tactics. ANEPC has advised that itis currently intended that all elements with functions within the Operations Management System (SGO) receive an adequate level of training onthe useof aerial means. A textbook of aerial firefighting in Portugal, Aerial Means in Rural Fire Fighting is currently being finalised by ANEPC. This document will provide a good basis for designing and delivering appropriate training, and should be published as soon as practical. (Note: tobe clear, this isa different document from the Manual for the Coordination of Aerial Operations in Rural Fires referred toin Section 7.2.) Asis the case with training for aerial coordination and supervision, training of “users” can potentially be delivered, at least in part, through on-line modules and relatively simple simulation technology. Recommendation 17: The Aerial Means in Rural Fire Fighting textbook drafted by ANEPC should be published asa matter of priority.
Recommendation 18: Ata minimum, formal training regarding appropriate deployment and utilisation of aerial resources should be provided for: i. any person who may occupy Operations Management System (SGO) roles equivalent to incident commander, division commander, sector commander or crew leader, or planning chief or logistics chief, at rural fires; with training for incident commanders asthe highest priority; ii. district relief commanders who may be involved in dispatch or strategic coordination of aerial resources. Indue course, completion ofthe respective air operations training module should become a requirement for Incident Commander certification or qualification. Note: ANEPC has advised that itis currently intended that all elements with functions within the (SGO) receive an adequate level of training onthe useof aerial means, supported bya specific module. There is also a plan to create a relevant Massive Open Online Course (MOOC). This Recommendation is intended to reinforce the priority and necessity of continuing to provide appropriate training to users of aerial means.
08 Aerial capabilities 8.1 Determining capability and capacity As described earlier, Portugal recognises that the most effective useof aerial resources for firefighting isin rapid initial attack, to help prevent incipient fires from becoming larger. In- principle, Portugal therefore focusses aerial firefighting effort on rapid initial attack. This clear focus received strong support amongst respondents. Determination ofthe appropriate aerial means for Portugal in terms of typology, numbers, placement and availability is therefore essentially based around the following underlying guidance, considered alongside the available funding: 1. Rapid Initial Attack i. during Phase III and Phase IV, there should be sufficient resources to “triangulate” an incipient fire with Initial Attack (ATI) resources, atany time during daylight hours, ideally: o with dedicated Initial Attack resources located within approximately 40km of potential fire starts in those parts of Portugal that present a conjunctural (combined) fire risk of High or Very High (mainly this occurs north ofthe Tagus River andin the Algarve region) o with dedicated Initial Attack Resources located within 80km kmof potential fire starts in other areas. ii. during Phases Iand Phase II, sufficient resources should be maintained to provide reasonable Initial Attack response, in accordance with the prevailing fire risk iii. during all Phases, sufficient resources designated for Extended Attack should be available to reinforce Initial Attack resources when required and appropriate. Initial Attack means are mostly: o HEBL (light helicopters with short-line bucket and5 person EHATI crew), oro in some locations, maybe HEBM (medium helicopters with short-line bucket and with 8-12 person BHATI crew). 2. Extended Attack (ATA) i. during all Phases there should be sufficient resources, in accordance with the prevailing fire risk, to provide reasonable response toany fire that escapes Initial Attack (usually regarded as extending beyond 90 minutes since detection). Extended Attack means are essentially: o HEBM with short-line buckets and8-12 person BHATI crew, ifnot designated for Initial Attack, ando HEBP (medium helicopters with long-line bucket), ando AVBM (medium amphibious aeroplanes), ando AVBP (heavy amphibious aeroplanes).
3. Specialist support means i. during all Phases there should be sufficient aerial resources for coordination, supervision, command, intelligence gathering and mapping. Specialist support means are essentially: o HERAC (light helicopter for coordination, supervision and reconnaissance); ando AVRAC (light aeroplane for specialist intelligence gathering and reconnaissance). As stated earlier, the guidance listed above is appropriate, butit would helpful to have the underpinning Principles clearly summarised and published, ideally as part ofa National Aerial Firefighting Strategic Plan or equivalent. Baseline resources The strategic analysis project used the aerial means component of DECIR for 2022 asa “baseline” or reference point for analysis of capacity in future years. Applying the guidance listed above, within available budgets, resulted ina DECIR national aerial firefighting fleet for 2022 that canbe summarised as follows: Illustration: AS350B3 HEBL with bucket on hook Image: HeliBravo Illustration: AS350B3 HEBL on standby atCMA helipad, Algeriz, Vale de Cambra Illustration: Agusta Westland AW119 Koala HERAC Image: FAP Illustration: Air Tractor AT802F Fireboss AVBM Image: Carlos Miguel Seabra
Type Operation Phase III IIIIV IIIII Permanent Shoulder Shoulder Peak Shoulder Shoulder All year 15/05-31/0501/06-30/0601/01-30/0901/10-15/1016/10-31/10 Special purpose: HERAC SOSO 11 11 AVRAC COCO 22 22 2Air Attack: HEBP COCO 33 3 HEBM COCO 1212 1212 12 HEBL SOCO 33 33 33 HEBL COCO 711 2323 2311 AVBP COCO 22 22 AVBM COCO 46 1414 1412 TOTAL 1437 6060 6040 [Total State-Owned] 33 44 43 SOSO: State Owned, State Operated; “State” includes FAP SOCO: State Owned, Contractor Operated COCO: Contractor Owned, Contractor Operated The following aircraft contracted by AFOCELCA maybe considered as part ofthe DECIR: III IIIIV IIIII HEBL COCO 3The following aircraft are also available: Medium UAV SOSO Upto 12 UAVision OGS42 for long range fire detection and surveillance Small UAV SOSO Various small UAV owned and operated byGNR-GIPS and ANEPC for local surveillance Other SOSO Other Armed Forces aircraft when required in emergencies, including P3 Orion for broad area surveillance Illustration: UAVision OGS42 medium UAV
The spatial distribution of DECIR aircraft during Phase IVmay be illustrated as follows: Illustration: Base locations and area of influence, HEBL and HEBM during Phase IV Source: ANEPC, reproduced from DON-DECIR 2022 Colours represent the conjunctural (combined) fire risk over the period. Baixa = low (green-yellow) Alta = high (red-dark red) Illustration: Base locations and area of influence, HEBP, AVBM and AVBP during Phase IV Source: ANEPC, reproduced from DON-DECIR 2022 Colours represent the conjunctural (combined) fire
Planned trends In summary, over the two to four years from 2022, subject to market conditions, availability and budget considerations, Portugal generally aims to: i. increase the number of leased HEBL (light helicopters for air attack) dispersed around the country, to further enhance rapid initial attack, particularly during Phases III and IV. Itis planned that the cost of increasing the number of HEBL will beat least partly offset by reducing the number of leased HEBM (medium helicopters for air attack), as light helicopters that are capable of dispensing a maximum of around 900to 1000 litres are often more cost effective than medium helicopters that carry a maximum of around 1300 to1400 litres ii. reduce the number of leased HEBM (medium helicopters) in favour of increasing HEBL capacity iii. commission and then increase the number of State-Owned HEBM/HEBP (medium-heavy firebombing helicopters, specifically theUH-60, or Black Hawk, type) iv increase the number of leased AVBM (medium amphibious aeroplane bombers) to improve the options to provide increased weight-of-attack in initial attack, andto provide additional, flexible resources for extended attack v. transition contractor owned and operated piston-engined AVBP (heavy amphibious aeroplane bombers) to turbine-engined AVBP or AVBM vi. evaluate the possibility of adding “super-heavy” HEBP tothe national fleet vii. evaluate the possibility of adding large fixed-wing airtankers (LAT) tothe fleet viii. increase the number of HERAC (light helicopters for reconnaissance andco-ordination) ix evaluate possibilities for expanding the use ofUAS (un-crewed aircraft). Inthe longer term (beyond 2026), itis aimed to: i. increase the number of State-Owned AVBP, in collaboration with the RescEU program ii. further increase the number of State-Owned HEBM/HEBP, subject to developing an appropriate business case. These trends are discussed further at sections 8.3, 8.4and 8.5. Matching resourcing levels to risk Ideally, all countries that use aerial means in fire management would implement rigorous, empirical systems and tools to guide and assist decisions onthe selection of types, numbers, availability levels and optimum locations of aerial resources in accordance with the threat posed by fires. However, most countries around the world have found that implementation of empirical resource-to-risk decision support systems can pose significant challenges. Issues usually encountered include: • lack of suitable historical records and data on fire occurrence andon the use of aerial means • lack of reliable data on effectiveness of aerial means, and lack of consistent approaches to measuring effectiveness • incompatibilities between datasets
• difficulties inthe attributing the fire control effects to aerial means, versus other means (particularly when aerial means often work in support roles, such as assisting ground crews) • fire control objectives may not always be clearly stated, making it difficult to assess effectiveness against objectives • taking into account the range of roles and tactics in fire control that canbe undertaken by aircraft • taking into account the range of factors that can affect efficiency and effectiveness of aerial fire control (including quality of coordination and supervision) • taking into account the range of different aircraft types that are used. Despite the difficulties, some good progress in developing resource-to-risk models has recently been made around the world. Data collection has improved asa result ofthe introduction of automated systems. Data management techniques have improved dramatically, while the cost of storing required data has reduced. Recent advancements in computer modelling of fire spread and damage now allow more rigorous desktop evaluation of different fire control options. Rapidly developing Artificial Intelligence (AI) technology will also certainly feature in resource-to-risk decision support systems and tools inthe near future. At this stage, however, itis fair tosay that the use of structured, empirical resource-to-risk decision support systems is necessarily limited, although itis certainly highly desirable to continue to develop these tools. In these circumstances, some degree of expert judgement will be required to determine the capabilities and capacities required to address landscape fire risks, andto determine appropriate the resourcing and availability levels. Portugal has evaluated, and continues to explore, the possibility of implementing structured resource-to-risk decision support systems for aerial means. A number of academic papers have also studied interactions between resourcing and availability of aerial means and the risks posed by landscape fire in Portugal. Dueto the constraints discussed above, generally these have been limited to examining selected aspects ofthe aerial means resourcing situation, however they have provided important knowledge that will contribute to structured decision support systems inthe future. Given the limitations of currently available empirical resource-to-risk systems and tools, most countries have adopted some form ofa system based ona “model-of-cover”. Usually these systems combine expert judgement about the effects of different resources with measures such as response times (usually the elapsed time fora specified resource to arrive ata fire location). In-effect, this isthe approach currently applied in Portugal. Some countries apply atwo-level approach to their model-of-cover systems. Typically this would be along the following lines: o Level 1: Initial attack Determine the resources required for Initial Attack based on setting objectives such as response times (standards of cover) that are appropriate tothe prevailing risk levels; plus o Level 2: Extended attack and campaign fires Determine the resources required for extended attack and campaign fires through application of critical incident analysis.
Critical incident analysis involves the use of historical data to create hypothetical scenarios of concurrent, compounding serious fire situations, combined with simultaneous initial attack situations, and examines the total resources that would be needed to allocate appropriate resources toall fires in that critical scenario. 8.2 Opportunities for savings An important part ofany strategic analysis is always an examination ofthe opportunities to make cost savings, which would in turn allow funds tobe deployed to activities which more efficiently or effectively addressed mitigation of risks associated with rural fires. Some respondents expressed a view that there were situations in Portugal where the number of aerial means, orthe level of availability of aerial means, could be reduced without adversely affecting the effectiveness of response. Examples that were cited include: • requirements for some aircraft tobe available (on immediate standby) for all daylight hours, even in periods during the day of relatively low fire risk (for example: early morning), orin the evening when a deployment would notbe practicable given remaining daylight • requiring some contracted aircraft to continue tobe available on days when the forecast or actual fire risk is relatively low. Some respondents also expressed a view that the total number of aircraft required tobe available during Phase IIand III could possibly be reduced, especially if there was more flexibility to move aircraft closer toany areas of relatively high fire risk. Not all respondents supported this view, however, with come citing the risk associated with lengthening fire seasons andan apparent increase inthe number of fires occurring outside the traditional fire season. There may also be contractual impediments to temporarily moving some aircraft to higher risk areas. Itis important to note that reducing aircraft availability does not necessarily result in reduced prices or cost savings. Many ofthe costs incurred byAir Operators in making aircraft available Finding 6: The current methodology used in Portugal to determine the aerial means capabilities and capacities required to address landscape fire risk, and the typology, location and availability levels of those capabilities, is generally appropriate, given the available data and the limitations of alternative or complementary approaches. The current methodology relies to some degree on expert judgement. Recommendation 19: Portugal should continue to research and develop structured, empirical resource-to-risk systems and tools to support making decisions about aerial means capabilities and capacities and the disposition and deployment of those capabilities. Note: immediate efforts should be directed towards identifying data required, so that appropriate data collection can commence inthe meantime. Itis suggested that Portugal also maintain close liaison with other countries that are exploring the development useof empirical resource-to-risk tools and systems for aerial means.
are fixed. Ifthe financial returns onthe contractor’s investment are reduced, contracts may not be viable for some Air Operators. In turn, this may reduce competition inthe market. However, even if there areno cost savings, there are usually other potential benefits in ensuring that aircraft are not required tobe immediately available when they are unlikely tobe deployed, for example: improved fatigue management for pilots, AMC crews and GIPS crews. Although the potential for cost savings isnot completely clear, there area number of alternative contracting models that may generate in savings. These models should at least be explored and, if appropriate, tested inthe market. Most contractor-owned-contractor-operated aerial fire management services in Portugal are currently provided through some form of contract that commits the aircraft and crew tobe immediately available tobe dispatched on each day during a defined continuous period in each year (specified asa minimum number of days). This type of contract would normally be referred toas “Exclusive Use” or “Absolute Availability” in other countries. One option that could be examined isa type of contract sometimes known as Partial Availability. Usually Partial Availability contracts adopt atwo-tiered availability system, which allows the Air Operator to undertake other work with the aircraft or pilot at times of relatively low fire risk, provided that they remain available tobe placed on immediate standby for fire response when justified bythe fire risk. Normally a three-tiered payment system applies: a “retainer” payment, plus a payment per day for the days when the aircraft is required for immediate standby orfor actual fire firefighting, plus a payment for each hour of actual operation. Again, itis important to note that Partial Availability may not necessarily reduce total contract costs. Partial Availability contracts are often attractive to locally-based Air Operators; however this type of contract is less likely to appeal to contractors who bring aircraft into the country solely to provide contracted aerial firefighting services. There is also an additional management overhead cost associated with determining the required availability of each Partial Availability aircraft ona daily basis. Other contracting models may also potentially provide some cost savings, such as “Call- When-Needed” contracts; or “included hours” contracts, where in-effect the Air Operator amortises the cost ofa certain number of flying hours into the standby charges. Recommendation 20: FAP works with ANEPC and GNR-GIPS to identify opportunities for cost savings through closely managing daily availability of aerial means. Recommendation 21: FAP market tests alternative contracting models by providing options in future procurement processes for tenderers to offer services ona Partial Availability or similar basis, orto offer other added-value propositions, such as included hours.
8.3 Initial attack resources As previously noted, Portugal recognises that the most effective useof aerial resources isin rapid initial attack (ATI), to prevent nascent (incipient) fires from becoming large. The strategic review project formed the view that the initial aerial attack system in Portugal isas well-structured as anywhere inthe world. Some respondents considered that there are minor gaps in coverage ofthe initial attack system, including inthe north west ofthe country. In most instances these gaps canbe covered with sensible useof other nearby aerial resources. ANEPC is aware of possible gaps and aims to adjust positioning ofthe fleet as opportunities arise. The project did not identify any clear requirement to increase total ATI resourcing beyond that already planned for beyond 2025. There wasa very strong common theme amongst respondents that the initial attack system could be further enhanced by earlier useof resources that are currently designated for extended attack (ATA), such as AVBM, AVBP and HEBM (medium) or HEBP (heavy) helicopters, when appropriate. This would provide valuable additional weight-of-attack inthe early stages ofa fire. Processes are currently implemented to allow this to happen, and there is evidence that deployment of designated ATA resources toATI situations is occurring more regularly. However, central approval for these deployments is required. In some instances, this may act asa cultural barrier for local fire commanders to request appropriate additional resources when additional weight-of-attack is warranted. Many respondents also suggested that there would also be benefits in providing greater flexibility for ATI helicopters to remain at fires, where appropriate, beyond the90-minute initial attack period. There was not universal agreement on this point, some respondents preferred to maintain the integrity ofthe initial attack system to deal with any further outbreaks of fire. In reality, itis likely that there will certainly be individual situations where itis appropriate for the ATI resources to remain atan incident beyond 90 minutes, and there will be situations where it will be preferable that they return toATI mode atthe endof the90-minute period. Again, processes are currently implemented to provide this flexibility, but some respondents expressed the view that they had still observed situations where it would have been beneficial for the ATI aircraft to remain, yet they were required to return to their CMA. This may, in-part, bedue to existing legal, contractual and logistical constraints. Improving the overall capacity for airborne coordination and supervision will assist in resolving this type of situation, as trained COPAR-Ar will be able to provide definitive, expert advice regarding optimum deployment of resources. Implementation ofa National Aircraft Coordinator or equivalent role, and ensuring adequate expert aviation support for the CNEPC would also assist with rapid assessment of situations where ATA resources should be used to support ATI, or where ATI resources should be considered for ATA. ANAC or equivalent would also arrange appropriate “backfill” when required, for example: moving anATI helicopter and crew from aCMA inan area of relatively low fire risk, to replace anATI helicopter that is being used for ATA. Finding 7: The system for rapid initial attack of nascent landscape fires with aerial means in Portugal is comprehensive and well-structured, and generally represents best-practice. The priority given to initial attack is appropriate.
Initial attack – light helicopters and medium helicopters Several respondents raised concerns regarding the trend to prefer leasing HEBL (light helicopters) rather than HEBM (medium helicopters) for air attack. Both categories, HEBL and HEBM, cover a wide range of possible aircraft makes and models, with different capacities. The HEBL models most often engaged in Portugal are largely variants ofthe Aerospatiale AS350B3 (later models are known asthe Airbus H125). This model is regarded asone ofthe more capable light helicopter options. When used with a typical bucket, in moderate conditions, itis reasonable to plan on dispensing at least 700to 800 litres of water on each lift. An AS350B3 will also carry 5 firefighters plus pilot in most conditions, with a reasonable load of fuel. In recent years, the HEBM models most often engaged in Portugal have been variants ofthe Bell 212or Bell 412. Lifting capacities can vary considerably between the different models of Bell medium helicopters, and even between individual aircraft ofthe same model. Depending onthe fuel carried and the basic weight ofthe particular aircraft being used, itis reasonable to generally plan on HEBM dispensing somewhere between 900 and 1350 litres per lift, or carrying at least 8 firefighters plus pilot. Directly comparing the effectiveness and efficiency of different models of HEBL and HEBM isnot simple, and needs to take into account a wide range of factors. Itis also necessary to understand the fire control objectives. For example: if aircraft equipped with underbelly tanks are favoured dueto local conditions such asthe nature of water sources, HEBM maybe preferred. There isa wider range of tanks available for HEBM, and for most HEBM, the weight ofthe tank will form a lower proportion ofthe aircraft operating weight, compared toa HEBL with tank. If there isno requirement to carry passengers, this may also open upthe possibility of using other makes and models of HEBM, with more attractive cost profiles. Any comparison also needs to take into account other capabilities that maybe available inthe aerial firefighting fleet. For example: the need for leased HEBM maybe reduced if other, heavier, air attack helicopters are readily available. In very general terms, the contract leasing costs fora capable HEBL, such asan AS350B3 will most likely be significantly less than fora typical HEBM such asa Bell 212or Bell 412. The cost per litre of water dispensed, or firefighter delivered, is also likely tobe lower for the HEBL in most circumstances, although this will depend onthe particular situation. Recommendation 22: ANEPC continue to promote and refine existing procedures that allow for early dispatch ofATA resources to initial attack situations when appropriate, or retention ofATI resources beyond the initial attack period; and that ANEPC work with FAPto reduce, asfar as practical, any legal, contractual and logistical constraints on such deployments. Illustration: Bell 412 HEBM Image: Carlos Miguel Seabra
The lower daily availability costs for leased HEBL mean that itis possible to make more HEBL available in total, therefore reducing response times in initial attack. In these circumstances, itis reasonable, in-principle, to substitute appropriate models of HEBL, such asthe AS350B3 or H125, for HEBM. However, there area range of factors tobe considered, and each instance needs tobe carefully evaluated. Risks associated with having a high proportion ofthe ATI fleet being provided bya single aircraft model should also be considered. 8.4 Extended attack resources Note: although this section discusses specific resources under the heading of extended attack, there isno reason why these resources cannot be used in initial attack, when appropriate, and this should be encouraged. Successful initial attack in some situations will often rely on weight-of-attack (that is, the total amount of suppressant or retardant dispensed inthe initial attack period) as well asthe speed of attack. Extended attack - heavy amphibious aeroplanes The Canadair CL series aircraft are well-suited to Portugal and are interoperable with other European countries. Itis appropriate for Portugal to retain access, if possible, to heavier scooping aircraft (AVBP) to deal with higher intensity and larger fires. Most respondents agreed that Portugal should ideally, inthe future, have access to immediate response from four tosix heavy scooping aircraft, at least during Phase III and Phase IV. Currently, two Canadair reciprocating engine CL- 215s are leased. Two, new DHC-515 turbine- engined aircraft, tobe state-owned, have been ordered. Introduction to service ofthe DHC-515is expected around 2027, however there are risks associated with meeting this timeline. Planned production ofthe DHC-515 aircraft should be carefully monitored. The leased CL-215 aeroplanes are ageing and have significant limitations. They have limited effectiveness in some situations and are compromised by maintenance downtime, relatively low dispatch reliability and, at times, limited access to Avgas fuel. This situation isnot likely to improve. Itis desirable to establish a path for retirement ofthe CL-215s in favour of appropriate turbine-engined AVBM or AVBP. Observation 9: Substituting higher total numbers of capable HEBL for HEBM is, in -principle, a reasonable strategy, provided sufficient high-quality HEBL and pilots are available, and provided that relative market costs continue to favour HEBL. However, each instance should be closely evaluated and considered onits merits, and should be considered inthe context ofthe desirable mixof capabilities and capacities inthe overall aerial firefighting fleet. Over the next 3to 5 years, selection decisions should also consider the possible risks associated with continued availability of heavier helicopters for air attack (for example: the leased KA32Ts). Illustration: De Havilland (Canadair) CL-215 AVBP Image: Carlos Miguel Seabra
Extended attack - large airtankers In very general terms, large fixed-wing airtankers (LAT) are likely to have limited applicability in Portugal. LATs are normally most cost-effective compared to smaller aircraft when: • there are relatively long distances between the relevant loading (filling) base and the fire, or • indirect attack is required, or • where additional weight-of-attack is required, usually inthe case of large or intense or fast-moving fires. LATs are usually most effective if used to dispense retardant for indirect attack. In some circumstances, with proper supervision, they canbe effective for direct attack with foam orgel. Itis rarely useful to dispense plain water from LATs. Useof LATs requires significant pre-planning and preparation, including, for example: • developing safe operating procedures and integration procedures • training specialist COPAR • providing suitable aerial platforms for COPAR (including lead-planes, if required bythe operating procedures) • identifying and preparing suitable CMAs (operating bases) • establishment of specialist infrastructure at CMAs, including for storing, mixing and loading retardant orgel or foam. Portugal has relatively few runways that are suitable for LATs. Those runways that are suitable for LATs in terms of length and pavement strength are mainly used to service regular public transport (airline) operations orare part of military installations. Having said that, most LATs are relatively fast, so having to travel longer distances tore-fill isnot necessarily a major disadvantage. Given current predictions, there will certainly be some situations in Portugal, inthe future, where useof LATs could be advantageous. The question is Recommendation 23: The two leased CL-215 AVBP be replaced with suitable turbine-engined, leased AVBP or AVBM, ideally CL-215T or CL415-EAF, orCL-415. This should be implemented as soon as possible, subject to funding. Note: itis understood that FAPis currently evaluating options to progress this Recommendation; andis also currently evaluating options to increase the total number of AVBP available to Portugal inthe longer term. Illustration: C-130Q (equivalent toC-130H), large airtanker, with RADS dispensing system
whether providing dedicated LAT capability to fill that niche will justify the cost. Options to reduce the cost and improve the economic viability of providing LAT capability could include: • sharing LAT capability and costs with another country, such as Spain, through bi-lateral agreement, or through a suitable EU mechanism • using suitable multi-role large aeroplanes, so that costs are offset against other roles. This could be: o civil aircraft, that can also undertake other tasks when not required for firefighting, such as passenger transport, medical transport, Search and Rescue, or servicing Portugal’s Autonomous Territories. Examples of multi-role, civil LATs include the Conair Q400MR and the Coulson 737 Fireliner. o military aircraft that normally undertake other military tasks, but can be configured for aerial firefighting when required. FAP currently operate a number of aircraft types that canat least be hypothetically converted for firefighting missions, including the CASA 295, C-390 and C-130. Whether ornot it would be appropriate, viable or cost effective to utilise FAP aircraft as LATs requires detailed further investigation. Considerations include, for example: − effect onthe ability to deliver other FAP responsibilities − residual value of airframe and engines − cost of conversion − cost of other modifications required (for example: C-130s may require wing box replacement or strengthening) − cost and effort of sustaining the capability, including training of pilots and maintaining pilot skills − effect on service life of airframes and components − additional maintenance requirements. Illustration: C-390 with MAFFS dispensing system Image: MAFFS
Extended Attack – super-heavy helicopters Some respondents considered that itwas important for Portugal to have access toa “super- heavy” helicopter capability for ATA, at least during Phase IV. (Super-heavy or “high-volume” bombing helicopters are usually regarded as those with a capacity to dispense 7000 litres or more, for example: Boeing CH47 Chinook, Erickson S64 Aircrane or similar). Not all respondents agreed on this topic, some considered that super-heavy helicopters were not necessary inthe Portuguese situation. Ithas been found from experience around the world that there are certainly situations where super-heavy helicopters canbe more effective compared to smaller aircraft. Mostly this isfor direct attack orfor direct protection of property, under conditions of extreme fire behaviour. Super-heavy helicopters have also proven tobe critical in some initial attack situations, especially when the fire is rapidly spreading. These types of situations are forecast to occur in Portugal more often inthe future. However, having super- heavy helicopters readily available is usually relatively expensive. As with LATS, inthe future there will certainly be some situations in Portugal where very heavy helicopters will be useful. As with LATs, there isa question of whether providing a super- heavy helicopter capability will justify the cost. Options to reduce the cost and improve the economic viability of providing a super- heavy helicopter capability for air attack could include: • sharing the capability and costs with another country, such as Spain, through bi-lateral agreement, or through a suitable EU mechanism • using suitable multi-role super-heavy helicopters, so that costs are offset against other roles. This could be: Recommendation 24: Portugal initiate a specific project to: i. closely evaluate the costs and benefits of having a large fixed-wing airtanker (LAT) capability available for aerial firefighting; andii. identify viable options for making available aLAT capability, using either military or civil aircraft. Note: this project would ideally be conducted under the auspices ofthe high-level, interagency governance arrangement such asthe Aerial Means Strategic Coordination Committee or Board recommended at Section 5.3; and would logically beled byFAP. It understood that FAP has already commenced preliminary work ona project to evaluate LAT options. Illustration: example of super-heavy helicopter, Erickson S64 Aircrane, seen here in scooping mode.
o civil or military aircraft that can undertake other missions when not required for firefighting. For example: a CH47D Chinook equipped with a Coulson RADS tank offers this possibility. The firefighting tank canbe quickly removed and the aircraft returned to passenger or cargo configuration. Alternatively, many super-heavy helicopters canbe used for commercial heavy lifting and construction tasks. Of course, these alternative roles are only economically helpful if there is sufficient demand from either military or civil users for such missions. Itis worth noting that in many circumstances, twoUH-60 Black Hawk helicopters (see below) or similar medium-heavy helicopters such asthe AS322 (H215), will deliver a similar total volume of water or foam asone super-heavy helicopter. TheUH-60is well suited tothe Portuguese situation and two medium-heavy helicopters would provide greater mission flexibility than one super-heavy helicopter. This suggests that Portugal should at least consider increasing the number ofUH-60or equivalent helicopters available for firefighting, asan alternative to purchasing or leasing a super-heavy helicopter capability. Another option to consider is investigating commercial contract arrangements to provide a super-heavy helicopter capability only when required bythe forecast fire risk, for example: only for fire seasons that are forecast tobe more severe than normal. Observation 10: Providing a super-heavy helicopter capability for air attack in Portugal should be considered. Whether itis viable to provide a capability will largely depend onthe cost. There maybe options toat least partially offset costs against other uses, orto share costs with an international partner. Another option to explore isto manage the capability so that costs are only incurred when the capability is most likely tobe required. Increasing the number of medium-heavy helicopters available for firebombing, such asthe UH-60 Black Hawk or equivalent, could be considered asan alternative to providing a super heavy helicopter capability. (UH-60s are more likely tobe a viable alternative to super-heavy helicopters only if higher performance models ofthe UH-60are utilised, such asthe UH-60A+ orUH-60L, preferably with firebombing tanks). Providing heavy or super-heavy helicopter capability should not occur atthe expense ofATI (initial attack) capacity. ATIis still the most efficient and effective useof aerial means in most circumstances.
Extended Attack – Medium-Heavy Helicopters From 2007, Portugal utilised upto six State- owned Kamov KA32A HEBP for firefighting, initially operated bythe State Corporation, Empresa de Meios Aéreo (EMA) and subsequently operated by private contractors. Although variants ofthe KA32 are capable firefighting helicopters, and are well suited the aerial firefighting environment in Portugal, the KA32A helicopters proved tobe difficult to maintain, resulting in relatively low availability and low dispatch reliability. A shortage of qualified mechanics and issues in obtaining approved spare parts were central factors. Maintenance and repair problems were exacerbated by pandemic-related supply-chain issues in 2020 and became critical in 2022 dueto the world political situation. In March 2022, EASA suspended European type certification for the KA32 type. Supply chain issues are expected to continue. Under this combination of circumstances, ithas become impractical to continue to operate the State-owned KA32As, and there isnow little likelihood of them being able to reach operational readiness for firefighting. In October 2022, the Government of Portugal therefore agreed to make the six (unserviceable) KA32A airframes available tothe Government of Ukraine. All respondents who commented on this issue agreed that, given the prevailing circumstances, this isa sensible resolution. . Inmid-2022 Portugal entered into a contract for the purchase ofsix UH-60A Black Hawk helicopters, primarily to provide medium-heavy firebombing capability for ATA. The aircraft are due tobe delivered progressively from 2023 to 2026. The possibility of purchasing additional Black Hawks is under consideration. As well asair attack, the Black Hawks are likely tobe suitable platforms for future implementation of “BRIF” or “Helitack” specialised, airborne forest firefighting crews. The Black Hawks are also likely tobe well- suited to other FAP and ANEPC roles, such as winch rescue. The Black Hawk type is considered appropriate tothe Portuguese situation. There isa significant body of experience around the world in using Black Hawks for firefighting, and the type isnow well proven asa capable, reliable firefighting resource in other countries. Finding 8: It would not have been practical to return the State-owned Kamov KA32A HEBPs to operational readiness inthe foreseeable future. The decision to decommission the KA32As from consideration for inclusion inthe DECIR is logical and sensible. Illustration: Kamov KA32A, former HEBP Image: Media of Portugal Illustration: Military UH-60 with bucket on hook inthe U.S.A. Image: U.S. Department of Defence
The strategic analysis project identified a number of potential risks regarding implementation ofthe Black Hawk in Portugal, however, including: • there isa worldwide shortage of Black Hawk pilots with appropriate firefighting experience. Careful attention to recruitment, andto a program of pilot training that also allows pilots to gain appropriate experience will be required. This may possibly extend the planned timelines for full operational readiness ofthe Black Hawks • the model of Black Hawk that is currently scheduled for delivery toFAP isthe UH-60A, with “-700” engines. Operating Black Hawks with -700 engines may pose some challenges inthe future. Although very capable at lower altitudes, the performance of Black Hawks powered by -700 engines canbe limited under the “hot-and-high” conditions that are typically encountered in fire-prone regions of Portugal during summer • the model ofUH-60A Black Hawk that is currently scheduled for delivery isa version that limits external loads carried onthe hook to 3628kg (8000 lbs). 8.5 Resourcing risks Fleet diversity Several respondents noted that a large proportion of helicopters used in aerial firefighting in Portugal areof a single make and model: the AS350. HEBL used for ATI are mostly AS350B3 (orthe later model, known bythe current market designation of Airbus H125). Similarly, all leased AVBM aircraft are the Air Tractor AT802F model. An adverse event such asan urgent Airworthiness Directive that prevented or restricted operation ofa specific aircraft make or model could therefore seriously compromise Portugal’s aerial firefighting capacity. Recommendation 27: FAP evaluate the possibility of powering state-owned Black Hawks with variants ofthe “-701” engine, and equipping the aircraft with upgraded powertrain components. Observation 11: TheUH-60 Black-Hawk type is generally well-suited to aerial firefighting in Portugal from a number of perspectives; and potentially fills a capability gap for a medium-heavy helicopter that can also carry firefighters. Implementation ofa new aircraft type such asthe UH-60is a complex process. A conservative approach is appropriate to manage risks and ensure safety. The capability is likely to take some years to reach full operational readiness, including provision of properly experienced flight crews. This risk should be taken into account when making decisions regarding other capabilities inthe aerial firefighting fleet. Recommendation 26: Itis recommended that the FAP closely liaise with other firefighting operators of Black Hawks around the world regarding best-practice in training ofUH-60 firefighting pilots.
While the risks associated with such an event could be reduced by including a range of other aircraft types inthe fleet, this is likely toadd extra cost and could reduce overall efficiency. It also potentially introduces additional risks. The models of aircraft used in Portugal are well-proven and are well supported bythe respective manufacturers or their agents (with one current exception relating tothe KA32 type. Refer to “other key resourcing risks”, over the page). While some form of broad, temporary or ongoing restriction onthe operation ofa specific model of aircraft is possible, itis considered tobe ata relatively low likelihood of occurrence. However the consequences of such an event could be catastrophic. Accordingly it would be prudent to prepare appropriate contingency plans. Operator diversity Several respondents also noted that a large proportion of leased aircraft used in aerial firefighting in Portugal are provided bya relatively small number ofAir Operators. An event such asa corporate failure, insolvency orthe withdrawal ofAir Operator certification could prevent a contractor from supplying aviation services. Again, this could seriously compromise Portugal’s aerial firefighting capacity. Having a relatively small number of suppliers providing the majority of services can have other disadvantages. Some other countries have observed that itcan reduce competition inthe market and potentially can stifle innovation. Onthe other hand, there are potential advantages in economies of scale, efficiencies in contract administration, and improved standardisation. Some respondents suggested that there would be merit in limiting the number of firefighting aircraft that could be supplied byan individual Air Operator. While this would increase the diversity ofAir Operators, and reduce the risks associated with non-availability ofan Air Operator who was supplying a large number of aircraft, itis likely to increase total costs andto introduce other risks. Limiting anAir Operator’s eligibility to supply aircraft services would also complicate procurement processes, introducing selection considerations other than price and value-for-money. On balance itis considered that the most appropriate primary mitigation isto minimise the likelihood of occurrence ofnon-availability of contracted Air Operators. This canbe achieved through rigorous financial and operational due diligence of potential contractors during Observation 12: An event that will prevent or restrict operation ofall aircraft ofa specific make or model is considered tobe alow likelihood of occurring, but the consequences could be catastrophic and could seriously compromise Portugal’s aerial firefighting capacity. Increasing the diversity of aircraft makes and models inthe fleet could be considered, but this is likely to introduce other issues. Recommendation 28: FAP, in collaboration with ANEPC, continue to closely monitor the risks associated with a lack of diversity of makes and models of DECIR aircraft, within a risk management (likelihood and consequence) framework; and implement risk mitigation strategies, including contingency plans, when andif required.
procurement processes, and ongoing monitoring of contractor performance during the contract period. While due diligence processes will minimise the risk of occurrence, the failure ofan Air Operator to provide multiple aircraft services during a contract period is still possible, and the consequences of such an event could be serious. Accordingly it would be prudent to prepare appropriate contingency plans. Other key resourcing risks A number of other potentially important resourcing risks were identified during the strategic analysis project. Mostly these canbe mitigated to some degree, or contingency arrangements canbe implemented. However, Portugal’s aerial firefighting capacity could be significantly affected if several adverse events happened to coincide, resulting innon-availability of multiple aircraft ofthe same type, or multiple types of aircraft. The possibility of multiple adverse events occurring is most likely inthe period 2023 to 2028. This isa period when Portugal will be transitioning to some new supply arrangements and implementing new capabilities, butis also likely tobe a period of high-competition and uncertainty inthe market for some categories of aerial firefighting resources. Asan illustrative, purely hypothetical example: if there were delays in achieving full operational readiness ofFAP UH-60 Black Hawks, and the leased KA32T HEBP became unavailable atthe same time, Portugal would have no access to HEBP capacity orto long-line bucket capability, unless appropriate contingency arrangements had been made. Observation 13: An event that will prevent or restrict a single Air Operator from supplying multiple leased aircraft services is considered tobe a relatively low likelihood of occurring, but the consequences could be serious and could significantly compromise Portugal’s aerial firefighting capacity. Limiting the number of DECIR aircraft permitted tobe supplied through a single Air Operator could be considered, however this is likely to introduce other issues and could potentially compromise fair procurement. Exercising comprehensive due diligence onAir Operators, to minimise the likelihood ofan adverse event, isthe preferred mitigation strategy, at least inthe short to medium term. Recommendation 29: FAP, in collaboration with ANEPC, continue to closely monitor the risks associated with a small number ofAir Operators supplying a relatively high proportion ofthe DECIR aerial firefighting fleet, within a risk management (likelihood and consequence) framework; and implement appropriate risk mitigation strategies, when andif required. Risk mitigation strategies should include: i. a high degree of technical and financial due diligence on potential contractors during procurement processes; andii. a high degree of technical and financial due diligence on contractors during the contract supply period; and iii. contingency planning.
As such, all resourcing risks should continue tobe closely monitored, and where appropriate, contingency plans should be developed. Resourcing risks include: i. Availability of suitable HEBL pilots There is some possibility that Air Operators will notbe able to provide sufficient high- quality HEBL pilots with appropriate firefighting experience and Portuguese language skills during coming European summers. This is mainly dueto current market conditions, which are likely to continue for some years. ii. Availability of HEBP and long-line bucket capability Three leased Kamov KA32T helicopters currently provide an important ATA capability, and are currently the only aircraft inthe fleet capable of operating with a bucket ona long- line. There is some possibility that the Air Operator may not be able to supply or maintain these aircraft dueto the world political situation and interruptions tothe supply-chain for required spare parts. iii. Commissioning ofUH-60 Black Hawks The planned, progressive commissioning ofFAP owned and operated UH-60 Black Hawks from 2023 will provide an important and necessary increase in Portugal’sATI and ATA capacity. In addition, in coming years, Portugal aims to decrease the number of medium helicopters (for example: Bell 212, Bell 412) in favour of increased numbers of high- capacity light helicopters (for example: AS350B3). As discussed earlier, this is considered tobe a reasonable strategy, as greater numbers of high-capacity HEBL will provide improved coverage and will likely deliver equivalent amounts of water ata lower cost. To some degree the loss of medium helicopter capacity for ATA and ATI will also subsequently be offset bythe introduction ofthe UH-60 Black Hawks. As outlined above, UH-60s have been ordered, but there are timing risks with introducing and commissioning theUH-60 capability. Some of these risks relate to ensuring appropriate pilot training and experience. Itis appropriate to take a conservative approach, andit may take some years for the UH-60sto reach full operational readiness. iv. Availability of leased AVBM aircraft The AT802F Fireboss aeroplanes are well suited to Portugal and are interoperable with other European countries. The aircraft type is well suited to Initial Attack and Extended Attack. Portugal intends to increase the number of AVBM available during Phases III and IVin each year. There is also a possibility that AVBM could substitute for AVBP, should there be delays in commissioning turbine-engined AVBP, ornew AVBP. During the 2022 and 2023 northern hemisphere summers, there has been a very strong market around the world for provision of leased AT802F aircraft services, and significant inter-country competition. This market situation is expected to continue for the foreseeable future. In this market, Air Operators may face some difficulties providing required numbers of leased AVBM. Illustration: Kamov KA32T HEBP Image: Daniel Silva
v. Availability of suitable AVBM pilots There is some possibility that Air Operators will notbe able to provide sufficient Fireboss pilots with appropriate firefighting experience and Portuguese language skills during the coming European summers. Again, this is mainly dueto market conditions, as well as limited opportunities to train firefighting pilots. This market situation is expected to continue for some years. vi. Access to AVBP As outlined above, Portugal currently maintains access to2 leased CL-215 AVBP andit is desirable, if practical, to replace these aircraft with suitable turbine-engined aircraft. This will increase capacity and improve reliability. FAPis currently evaluating options to progress the replacement. Portugal has also ordered 2 additional newDe Havilland DHC-5155 AVBP, dueto be delivered after 2027, andis evaluating the possibility of ordering additional AVBP. The current world market for turbine-engined AVBP is “tight”, there are very few suitable aeroplanes available and long lead times to supply. Delivery ofnew AVBP from the DeHavilland DH-series relies onre-commencement ofthe Canadian production line. Timely re-commencement of production ofany aircraft always carries risk. There isa reasonable possibility that there will be delays in commissioning new AVBP. Other manufacturers intend to bring alternative AVBP tothe market (for example: AVIC AG600, ShinMaywa US-2). While any suitable aircraft should be always be evaluated, neither of these examples has yet been proven in firefighting configuration andit appears that there isa low probability that they will provide viable options inthe short to medium term. 5DHC-515is an evolution ofthe Canadair CL-415 Finding 9: There are risks tothe introduction or continued availability of some important aerial resources. Portugal’s aerial firefighting capacity could be significantly affected if several adverse outcomes happened to coincide, resulting innon-availability of multiple aircraft ofthe same type, or multiple types of aircraft. The probability of multiple adverse events occurring, and the potential consequences, is considered to greatest over the next five years orso, from 2023 to 2028. Recommendation 30: FAP, in collaboration with ANEPC, continue to closely monitor the key risks associated with the introduction or continued availability of aerial means for rural firefighting, within a risk management (likelihood and consequence) framework; and implement appropriate risk mitigation strategies, when andif required. Risk mitigation strategies should include identification of contingency options and preparation of contingency plans, where appropriate.
8.6 Special capabilities Night air attack Around the world, air attack of landscape fires is mostly limited to daylight hours dueto legal and practical considerations. Many countries aspire to provide a capability to attack fires at night using aircraft. Aerial attack at night can take advantage ofthe cooler conditions and milder fire behaviour that usually prevail. Recent advances in night vision technology, combined with comprehensive mapping of vertical obstructions have seen several countries implement limited night aerial firefighting programs, mainly using helicopters with underbelly tanks. A small number of AT802 fixed- wing bombers have also been used. Respondents were very much divided onthe subject of whether Portugal should develop a night aerial firefighting capability. Some respondents strongly supported the proposition, others were strongly ofthe view that it would be impractical to safely deliver a night capability, mainly dueto the flying environment being heavily laden with wires and other vertical obstructions. Certainly the wire-laden environment in Portugal isa significant issue for safe air operations at night. Night aerial firefighting can also be relatively expensive, dueto requirements for extensive additional pilot training and recurrent skills maintenance. High-cost, high-maintenance specialised equipment, such as nigh vision goggles (NVGor NVIS) is also necessary. On current trends and forecasts, Portugal is likely tosee more landscape fires at night, and will experience increased fire behaviour and threats to communities at night. Inthe future itis highly likely that the community will expect that a night aerial attack capability is available. Inthe absence ofa more detailed investigation, it would be reasonable to surmise that the most likely possibility for Portugal to implement a safe effective and cost-efficient night aerial attack capability would beto extend and adapt the proposed, FAP-operated UH-60 Black Hawk fleet. Although FAP has existing NVIS capability to draw on, this would still bea major project, and would most likely require that theUH-60sbe fitted with underbelly tanks instead of using underslung buckets. On balance, itis suggested that Portugal should aspire to eventually introduce a night air attack capability, however this should bethe result ofa very carefully planned, long-term project. Inany case, night air attack on rural fires should not proceed until wires and other vertical obstructions inthe target areas and along transit routes are comprehensively recorded and mapped, and this information is able tobe presented to pilots inan easily accessible and usable form. Illustration: trial night firebombing operations, Victoria, Australia using NVGin a Sikorsky S61N Image: Peter Norman
Retardant As fire seasons change andas the likelihood of concurrent severe events increases, there will clearly be some benefits in having a capability to dispense long-term retardant in Portugal for indirect attack during ATI and ATAon rural fires. Retardant will be especially valuable in situations where there maybe delays in arrival of sufficient ground firefighters, where itis dangerous to deploy ground crews dueto terrain and/or fire behaviour, or where spotting (projection) is likely to occur. Most respondents considered that itwas important for Portugal tobe ina position to dispense long-term retardant in appropriate situations. Providing a long-term retardant capability requires careful planning. Specialised storage, mixing and loading facilities are required. Aeroplanes (or helicopters) can only be filled onthe ground (orin a hover). It will be necessary to implement a system for approving, managing and handling the chemicals. Different aerial tactics and application techniques are required, and pilots and COPAR must be appropriately trained. Large fixed-wing airtankers (LATs) are most effective when used to dispense retardant (refer also to Section 8.4). If Portugal intends atany time to utilise aLAT capability, even if temporarily or only in emergency situations, an appropriate arrangement for the supply of suitable retardant must also be considered. Existing AT802F Fireboss AVBM can very effectively dispense retardant. However, most models of land-based (wheeled) AT802s will normally carry a greater load of retardant and will be significantly more efficient for retardant dispensing operations from land aerodromes. Itis worth noting that some countries very effectively employ portable equipment (often mounted ona trailer) for mixing and loading long-term retardant, especially for medium-sized (for example: Air Tractor AT802) bombing aircraft. This alleviates the need to establish permanent infrastructure at CMAs, and allows retardant mixing and loading capability tobe moved toa CMA closer tothe theatre of operation, if required. Overall itis suggested that Portugal closely evaluate the options for providing a capability to dispense long-term retardant, and develop a body of experience inthe logistics and use of retardant products. This would be logically achieved through a series of trials. Trials should include comparisons ofthe effectiveness and efficiency of land-based and amphibious AT802s for dispensing retardant inthe Portuguese situation. Gels (sometimes known as Water Enhancers) may provide a viable, lower cost alternative to long-term retardant inthe Portuguese situation. This will require further evaluation. Gel dispensing trials could be conducted alongside retardant dispensing trials. Observation 14: Itis logical that Portugal should aimto eventually introduce a night air attack capability for rural fires, however this should bethe result ofa very carefully planned, long-term project. Introduction of night air attack on rural fires will also require comprehensive, reliable recording and mapping of wires and other vertical obstructions.
Tech-aided intelligence gathering and mapping Aircraft can provide critical information for incident management teams to plan fire control strategy and tactics and for communities that are threatened by rural fires. An airborne capability that has been employed very successfully in some countries isa light helicopter equipped with gimballed, high resolution infra-red and visible spectrum sensors, along with automated onboard georeferencing and mapping systems. The image processing and mapping system is coupled with a communication system (usually based on bonded 4Gor 5G cellular phone channels) that can transmit digitised images and metadata tothe ground. Processed images can then easily be incorporated into existing agency GIS and incident command and control information systems, or used directly by firefighters onthe ground to plan fire response. The images are also displayed inthe aircraft for use bya COPAR-Aror anair observer. In some case images or derived information products are also transmitted to firebombing aircraft. Tobe clear, itis the onboard image processing and mapping capability that makes this type of system so useful. This allows the data gathered tobe integrated with other data to generate information products that are hugely valuable toa wide range of users. UAVs or light fixed-wing aircraft can certainly also be used asa platform for gimballed sensors. Indeed the FAP UAVision UAVs are used in this mode, particularly to support GNR-GIPS in surveillance (fire detection). However ithas been found that the flexibility offered by light helicopters, along with the ability to accommodate sophisticated onboard image rectification and processing, makes the light helicopter the preferred platform for this type of tech-aided intelligence gathering during actual response to rural fires. Recommendation 31: Portugal should conduct an operational trial and evaluation ofthe useof long-term retardant and gel. Note: ideally the trial would include evaluation ofthe useof portable or mobile equipment for mixing and loading retardant. Illustration: example of ground display of intelligence transmitted from light helicopter equipped with gimballed sensor and image processing system. Image: ACT ESA, Australian Capital Territory
Inthe Portuguese situation, a tech-aided intelligence gathering system could be incorporated onto an existing HERAC, ora light helicopter could be dedicated tothe task. This capability would complement the other airborne tech-aided information gathering aircraft: AVRAC with a downward looking sensor for broad-area mapping and surveillance, and the UAVision UAVs for surveillance (fire detection). The information gathered by tech-aided aerial platforms, and the efficient transmission of information products toa range of users, has been found tobe so valuable that itis not unusual for jurisdictions around the world to dedicate oneor more light helicopter solely to this task. Note: tech-aided information gathering is discussed further at Section 10.2 Recommendation 32: Portugal should initiate a specific project to closely evaluate the benefits and costs of having available a dedicated tech-aided intelligence gathering capability (gimballed sensors plus image processing plus communication) inan appropriate light helicopter. Note: this project would ideally be conducted under the auspices ofthe high-level, interagency governance arrangement such asthe Aerial Means Strategic Coordination Committee or Board recommended at Section 5.3; and would logically beled by ANEPC.
09 Support systems and processes 9.1 Safety and safety culture Safety of persons inthe air and onthe ground during aerial fire management is crucial. Accidents and safety-related incidents increase costs and reduce capacity. Injuries and loss of life and should be regarded as unacceptable. Maintaining a safe working environment in aerial firefighting is feasible, but presents some challenges, and requires specialised risk management. Challenges include, for example: • inherently hazardous air and ground environment • operations often conducted during extremes of weather • dynamic, continuous risk assessment is required • lower margins of error than in other aviation activities • the work is highly stressing and fatiguing • changes, diversions and distractions are normal • highly variable levels of activity, including long periods of inactivity • members ofthe broader team maybe outside ofthe aircraft and may notbe aviation professionals • high expectations of aerial assets during emergency situations • often single-pilot operations. Itcan be difficult to analyse aerial fire management incident and accident statistics around the world, as records are not comprehensive and are often kept in incompatible databases. Analysis of available data, and comparison to other industries, does however suggest that itis reasonable to conclude: • worldwide, aerial firefighting hasa poor safety record overall, compared to other aviation sectors • human factors are causal or contributing factors inthe majority of serious accidents and incidents, therefore these accidents could be regarded as avoidable. • experienced firefighting pilots are over-represented in serious incidents and accidents. Portugal isno exception. There have been a number of fatal or serious aerial firefighting accidents inthe past decade, most involving experienced pilots. Most respondents expressed some concern regarding the safety of aerial fire management. Several respondents expressed the view that, at times, a culture of machismo or “emergencyitis” may contribute to safety-related incidents and accidents. Actual and perceived pressure to continue unrealistic
tasks, orto continue tasks in adverse conditions was also cited as possible contributing factors. This is concerning. Itis important that Portugal continues to place a very high priority on improving safety in aerial fire management. Actioning a number ofthe recommendations in this report will contribute to improving safety outcomes. These include, for example: • adopting safety asthe most important guiding Principle for developing and maintaining aerial fire management capability (refer Section 6.1and Recommendation 7) • improving and increasing capacity for aerial coordination and supervision (Recommendations 10and 11) • improving training, especially through the use of simulation (Recommendation 40) • improving data collection and management (Recommendation 34) • a rigorous system for processing lessons learned (Recommendation 37) • progressing the resolution of safety-related technical and operational matters, including communication issues, as raised inthe Supplementary Report (refer to Appendix 1). A number of other productive actions are already in place, including: • the requirement for Air Operators to have in place tailored Safety Management Systems (while noting that in some other countries ithas been found that itis also necessary to ensure that Air Operators commit to actively using their Safety Management System). Other actions that could be considered include: • establishment ofa cross-agency safety committee or safety promotion committee including representatives of ANAC and Air Operators, to identify safety issues andco- ordinate resolution • regularly publishing safety promotion material • implementing a confidential reporting mechanism for safety issues • periodically reminding all relevant agencies and institutions, Air Operators and individual pilots of their obligations to maintain a safety culture, and reminding them that pilots are not obliged to accept taskings that they consider tobe unsafe • structuring contract payments to minimise financial incentives tofly in unsafe conditions. Finding 10: The safety record for aerial fire management in Portugal isnot ideal. All relevant agencies, institutions, Air Operators and individuals must continue to place very high priority on improving safety and maintaining a safe working environment.
9.2 Data and data management A transformational opportunity High quality information regarding the use of aerial means is crucial for effective management of aircraft in fire and emergency management. Quality data regarding the activity of individual aircraft is important for purposes such as: • safety, and managing aircraft emergencies • teamwork and inter-agency collaboration, where all actors use the same high-quality information • providing situational awareness for efficient fleet management • efficient selection and dispatch of aerial resources • identifying water sources • supporting water replacement programs for owners of water sources used in firefighting operations • forecasting and scheduling aircraft maintenance and crew rotations • providing incidental intelligence regarding fire or other emergency situations • accountability for use of high-cost resources • performance measurement against objectives • evaluating efficiency and performance of various aircraft types • accounting, validation of invoices and accounts • fraud prevention • research, including economic evaluation • accident and incident investigation • continuous improvement. Inthe future, quality historical data will also be required to inform Artificial Intelligence systems that will be used to support short, medium and long-term resource allocation decisions. Considerable advances have been made recently inthe technology for real-time tracking of aircraft, and for automatically recording key events such as engine-on, take-off, firebombing drop locations, amount dropped, landing, and engine-off. Recommendation 33: Portugal should develop a cohesive multi-agency action plan of definitive actions to promote a safety culture in aerial fire management andto reduce the number of accidents and safety-related incidents. Note: the preparation ofthe proposed action plan would ideally be conducted under the auspices ofthe high-level, interagency governance arrangement such asthe Aerial Means Strategic Coordination Committee or Board recommended at Section 5.3; and would logically beled by ANEPC and FAP, with appropriate input from ANAC.
In many countries this event data isnow automatically transmitted in near-real-time and fully integrated with other agency GIS and information management systems, and finance and accounting systems. Data is also stored for future uses such as performance analysis and research. FAP currently maintains a basic tracking system for DECIR aircraft. Although this system has been extremely useful, itis not easily integrated with other information systems and does not currently transmit or record event data that would be valuable for many purposes, for example: the location and amount of water dispensed. AFOCELCA currently maintains an automated system that transmits and records position and event data for aircraft leased by AFOCELCA. There are many options for structuring a suitable approach to data standards, collection and management. It would be relatively straightforward to tailor a system for Portugal that, asfar as practical, utilised existing systems for management and display of data. Experience with proven systems such asthe Automated Flight Following (AFF) plus Automated Telemetry Unit (ATU) system inthe U.S.A.; orthe ARENA system in Australia, could provide useful guidance. Off-the-shelf commercial systems are also available. Itis interesting to note that both the AFF system inthe U.S.A, and the ARENA system in Australia allow Air Operators to select and provide their ownin-aircraft tracking and event recording hardware, andto utilise the services ofa range of commercial tracking providers. This will often allow the Air Operator to utilise systems that were already installed inthe aircraft for the operator’sown aircraft management purposes. The Air Operator simply hasto supply the required data, in accordance with a data standard. The data standards for AFF and ARENA6 are compatible, meaning that anAir Operator who operates aircraft in both countries only requires one set ofin-aircraft hardware. Both AFF and ARENA also readily exchange data with other systems, for example: displaying common, high-quality aircraft position and event data ina wide variety of different command-and-control and GIS systems that were already operated bya wide range of stakeholder agencies. A “data standards” approach, similar to that used in other countries, is likely tobe approporiate in Portugal, asit will more readily accommodate, for example, aircraft that are shared from other countries in times of emergency. Interoperability of data systems across Europe should also be considered. Because historical aircraft tracking and event data will be important for future research and evaluation projects, including economic research, itis suggested that Portugal should aimto define data requirements and arrange for acquisition and storage of appropriate data to commence as soon as practical. This will allow a repository of suitable data, in appropriate formats, tobe built-upand available for analysis. 6 https://www.nafc.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2020/11/NAFC-Standard-OPS-014-Tracking-Event-Reporting- and-Messaging-v2020.1.pdf
Illustration: sample screen from ARENA (Australia) showing aircraft tracks. Note the incidental information that canbe easily derived regarding fire location and behaviour, and water sources. Image: courtesy of NAFC Illustration: sample screens from ARENA showing fills and drops from a single aircraft. Image: courtesy of NAFC Illustration: sample screen from ARENA showing examples of dispatch and decision support tools - in this case: “find and dispatch suitable aircraft with shortest elapsed time to arrive at fire.” Image: courtesy of NAFC
9.3 Incident Control System Clear and effective lines of command and control are absolutely crucial to safety and effectiveness ofany air operation ina fire or emergency situation, especially where multiple agencies are involved, asis the case in Portugal. Many countries around the world now utilise some variation ofan Incident Command System (ICS) to manage incidents such as wildfires. In some countries itis referred toas an Incident Control System, especially where the system extends beyond providing unified command of resources that are responding toan incident. Recommendation 34: Transformational opportunity Portugal should initiate a multi-agency project to design and implement a comprehensive, interagency approach to acquisition and management of aircraft data, that: o provides for the collection, storage and display of near-real-time aircraft tracking and event data, to defined standards; ando ensures that appropriate data canbe exchanged with other, existing agency information systems. This project should be commenced as soon as practical, to facilitate building a collection of data that canbe utilised for future research and evaluation projects, including economic evaluation. Note: the joint project would ideally be conducted under the auspices ofthe high-level, interagency governance arrangement such asthe Aerial Means Strategic Coordination Committee or Board recommended at Section 5.3; and would logically beled by ANEPC and FAP, and should involve AFOCELCA. Finding 11: Implementation ofa national approach tothe collection and management of comprehensive, high quality, data on aerial fire management operations isa transformational opportunity for Portugal. Observation 15: Most respondents strongly supported the proposition of implementing a national, inter- agency approach tothe collection and management of comprehensive, high quality, data on aerial fire management operations. Several respondents emphasised the importance of designing a system that utilised appropriate existing agency systems asfar as practicable, and ensuring that data canbe exchanged with existing systems. This is sensible.
Key characteristics ofan ICS normally include: • Unified Command: the system provides for unified command of resources, irrespective of originating agency or institution • Management by Objectives: an Incident Action Plan with clear incident control objectives is required • Span of Control. the system expands to ensure that each unit isnot overloaded by having to manage too many sub-units • Common structure and division of responsibility - most ICS-based management systems are arranged along the following lines: Management, supervision and support of aerial operations usually resides within the Operations line-of command, although some variants ofICS may place support functions for aerial operations in Logistics and support. Some variants ofICS place aerial intelligence gathering operations inthe Planning area. Portugal has introduced anICS-based system, known asthe Operations Management System (SGO). Implementation ofSGO at incidents is scaled according to incident size and complexity, which is categorised insix Phases. The SGO places responsibility for air operations command inthe Operations line-of- command. The key roles are: • Air Operations Officer (OPAR) whois responsible for overall management ofair operations atan incident (more or less equivalent toAir Operations Manager orAir Operations Branch Director inICS in some other countries); and • Air Operations Coordinator (COPAR) whois responsible foron-site coordination and supervision of aerial resources, either from the air orthe ground (more or less equivalent toAir Attack Supervisor, Air Attack Officer orAir Tactical Group Supervisor in some other countries). Oneof the issues found with ICSin other countries is that the scale ofair operations atan incident does not necessarily correlate with the scale ofthe incident itself – in other words itis possible to have a large and complex air operation ata relatively small (for example Phase 1or 2) incident. Conversely itis possible to have a small air operation ata large, complex fire incident. Experience has shown that the components ofan ICS system that are applicable toair operations should be implemented as soon asany aircraft are involved inan incident, and scaled according tothe nature ofthe air operation asit escalates. This should occur irrespective ofthe size or complexity (Phase) ofthe incident. In practical terms this means that, ata minimum, an OPAR and COPAR (either COPAR Aror COPAR-T) should be appointed for every incident where aircraft are involved. (A separate OPAR isnot necessarily required for smaller operations – the role maybe performed bya suitably trained person whois also performing other duties, but their responsibility for air operations must be clear.)
An important issue communicated by respondents is that although ICSis implemented in Portugal through SGO, not all actors (including some Air Operators) fully understood howit is applied, orthe roles and responsibilities ofthe key positions in relation toair operations. Opportunity for further development ofICS for air operations in Europe As previously mentioned, sharing of aerial resources across Europe is likely to increase inthe future. This will include sharing of personnel trained in specialist aviation support and supervision roles. Safe and effective sharing of resources must be underpinned by common and consistent command and control systems. Implementation ofICS across Europe is variable. With a currently established ICS-based system (the SGO), there isan opportunity for Portugal to lead orto play a major part in implementing a consistent approach toICS, at least for air operations, across Europe. As many fire-prone nations outside of Europe use ICS-based systems, this will also facilitate other international aerial resource sharing opportunities. Recommendation 35: ANEPC update relevant Operational Directives to improve clarity that the components ofSGO (ICS) that apply toair operations should be implemented inall Phases of incident response, and should then be scaled according tothe size and complexity ofair operations, rather than the complexity (Phase) ofthe Incident. Recommendation 36: ANEPC publish a concise summary ofthe application ofSGO (ICS) to aerial fire management in Portugal, and ensure that itis distributed toall relevant agencies, institutions and Air Operators. Note: Itis understood that ANEPC intends to soon publish the comprehensive textbook: Aerial Means in Rural Fire Fighting, which will include material onthe application ofthe SGO. However itis suggested that a summary guide be published inthe meantime. Observation 16: There isan opportunity for Portugal to take a leadership role in promoting adoption of common and consistent ICS-based systems for incident management in Europe, especially for air operations.
9.4 Lessons Learned system Experience around the world has shown that systematic approach to continuous improvement, anda culture of continuous improvement, are always essential features of safe, effective aviation activities in fire and emergency management. Agencies involved inthe SGFIR in Portugal arein fact legally obliged to adopt and apply continuous improvement strategies. A priority activity ofthe NPIRFM is Continuous Improvement (Priority PE3). Continuous improvement ina muti-agency environment poses challenges. Improvements identified byone agency or institution may require action by another agency, ormay require the coordinated efforts of several agencies. There needs tobe agreement on improvement actions andon the responsibilities and priorities for action. Progress on improvement actions must be monitored and recorded, with relevant information available toall agencies and institutions. Lessons-learned systems provide an important component of continuous improvement. AGIF is currently designing and implementing a cross-agency lessons-learned system for rural fire management in Portugal. This system should provide the ideal platform for sharing lessons learned across agencies and for documenting agreed improvement actions and responsibilities. 9.5 Procurement of commercial services Asis the case in most countries across the world, aerial fire management services in Portugal are procured from the commercial sector (from Air Operators) via publicly advertised tender or solicitation processes. Tender processes are managed byFAP in accordance with rules and regulations laid down by Portuguese federal law governing public purchasing and procurement. Experience in many jurisdictions has shown that, inthe case of highly specialised services such as aviation, generic public tender processes donot always provide the optimum result. In particular, despite the best efforts of process designers, there canbe a tendency to select providers that tender the lowest prices rather than providers who offer additional value and ultimately provide the best value-for-money. Specifying pricing “caps” (for example the Recommendation 37: Portugal adopt a common, interagency system for recording lessons learned for aerial fire management, including agreed corrective actions and responsibilities. Note: the Lessons Learned system currently being designed and implemented by AGIF is expected to provide a suitable platform. Observation 17: Agreed actions arising from this Aerial Strategic Analysis project, including those ofan operational or technical nature, could be appropriately recorded inthe common Lessons Learned system, as soon asit is functional.
maximum total contract price that will be paid) can deter potential suppliers and reduce competition, and can make it difficult to establish true market prices for required services. Sometimes there may also a need to meet broader objectives other than lowest price or best value-for-money, such as achieving fleet diversity or diversity ofAir Operators, for risk management purposes (refer to Section 8.5). There isno doubt that designing fair and open procurement of highly specialised aviation services such as aerial firefighting, that also meet the required legal and probity standards canbe challenging. Volumes (for example: the number of flight hours expected) canbe difficult to forecast. Services required can often be provided bya range of different aircraft types and operators, all with varying characteristics and advantages and disadvantages. This makes evaluation complicated. Setting technical specifications at readily achievable, minimum levels does encourage competition, but can also lead to selection of lower quality operators and can work against innovation continuous improvement. Tobe clear, these are lessons learned about specialised procurement from other jurisdictions, and this strategic analysis project does not suggest that minimum-standard operators have been selected in Portugal to date. However, itis a risk that needs tobe considered in future procurement. Observation 18: Procurement of highly specialised aviation services should ideally focus principally on best overall value-for- money, acknowledging that this may have tobe achieved within a budget. Recommendation 38: FAP work with the relevant financial agencies in Portugal to design specific procurement processes for highly specialised aviation services that: • meet the required standards of probity, integrity and fairness • provide best value-for-money, overall • allow for market testing of alternative contract options, such as Partial Availability • allow tenderers to offer added-value services and alternative means of compliance that may provide extra value • donot necessarily specify pricing or total value caps, when appropriate • provide some flexibility to meet wider objectives, ifand when required, such as fleet diversity or operator diversity.
9.6 Aerial resources classification The definitions for the classification of DECIR aerial resources for aerial firefighting in Portugal are: Definition (abbreviated from DON-DECIR) HEBL Helicópteros Bombardeiros Ligeiros Light bomber helicopters, used to transport teams upto 5 persons andto discharge water from a bucket, with a maximum discharge capacity of750 litres HEBM Helicópteros Bombardeiros Médios Medium bomber helicopters, used to transport teams of8-12 persons andto discharge water from a bucket, with a maximum discharge capacity of1.100 litres HEBP Helicópteros Bombardeiros Pesados Heavy bomber helicopters, used toto discharge water from a bucket, with a maximum discharge capacity of4.000 litres HERAC Helicóptero de Reconhecimento, Avaliação e Coordenação Helicopter used in aerial firefighting coordination missions for and, when necessary, the reconnaissance and assessment of incidents. AVBM Aviões Bombardeiros Médios Amphibious medium bomber aeroplane used to discharge water or other extinguishing agents from an internal tank, with a maximum discharge capacity of3.000 litres AVBP Aviões Bombardeiros Pesados Amphibious medium bomber aeroplane used to discharge water or other extinguishing agents from an internal tank, with a maximum discharge capacity of5.000 litres AVRAC Aviões de Reconhecimento, Avaliação e Coordenação Reconnaissance and assessment aeroplane, usually with a system operator, who has knowledge of fire behavior analysis. May also be used asa platform for COPAR-Ar Some respondents expressed concern that definitions used inthe classification system maybe limiting in certain circumstances, especially if used in procurement. Respondents also indicated that they were unclear whether this system was only intended tobe a convenient wayof describing capabilities that were already part of DECIR, orwas intended to serve broader purposes (such asin tender processes). Aircraft classification systems used elsewhere inthe world normally specify minimum discharge amounts for different categories of aircraft. Specifying maximum discharge amounts may limit options to consider larger, more efficient aircraft during procurement processes. Other respondent comments included: • there is some uncertainty about whether the classification system is intended to refer tothe aircraft (for example: HEBL = light helicopter), orthe total capability (for example: HEBL = light helicopter + bucket + EHATI) • the current classifications donot appear to provide for light or medium bombing helicopters that cannot carry passengers (for regulatory reasons), should these be part of DECIR inthe future • the system does not currently explicitly provide for helicopters equipped with tanks
• the system does not currently explicitly provide for medium or large land-based (wheeled) bombing aircraft, should these be utilised inthe future • it would be useful to extend the classification system to accommodate different uncrewed aircraft (UAS) capabilities • there maybe advantages in aligning the classification system with systems that are used in other countries (such asthe “Type 1, Type 2etc.” system used inthe U.S.A. and elsewhere, while acknowledging that these systems also have some limitations). Most importantly, it became apparent during the strategic analysis project that some agencies and institutions had, at least informally, adopted other classification systems for their internal use. Asan example, some agencies refer toUH-60 Black Hawks as “medium” helicopters, others referred to them as “heavy” helicopters. This disparity has potential risks, and may lead to confusion. Itis important that all agencies and institutions, and the aviation industry, have a consistent approach to classification anda common understanding of categories of aerial means. 9.7Use of simulation This report has previously noted the importance of ensuring the provision of sufficient competent, trained and qualified people to manage, supervise, direct and support specialist aviation capabilities such as those used for aerial firefighting. This can present a challenge for agencies and institutions involved in rural fire management. Aviation training is specialised, relatively costly and time consuming. The coordination, logistics and scheduling of aviation related training presents particular difficulties. Provision of surge capacity for specialist aviation roles is also inherently problematic, as there isa need to balance optimum numbers of trained personnel against the costs and challenges of providing sufficient training, while also maintaining high standards. Maintaining aviation skills presents issues for qualified personnel, with limited real-world opportunities to train and practice. Lack of skills maintenance can have a very significant effect on overall capacity. Inthe past decade, there have been significant developments in training methods for specialist personnel involved in high-risk, low-task-frequency industry sectors such as aerial firefighting. Although simulation techniques have been available for some time, the advent of affordable, capable and effective computer-based simulation (CBS) isat the forefront of what can only be described asa significant shift inthe way training and skills maintenance is delivered for Recommendation 39: ANEPC and FAP collaborate to review Portugal’s aerial firefighting aircraft classification, and aim to develop a common, agreed system that meets all operational and procurement needs. Note: Inthe meantime, asfar as practicable, a single system should be used. Logically this would bethe system described inDON-DECIR, acknowledging that this may need tobe supplemented for some purposes. Note: Asfar as practicable, classification systems for aerial firefighting aircraft should ideally align criteria and terminology with classification systems used elsewhere in Europe and around the world.
technical and operations-centred training in many industries. CBS offers features that can greatly enhance and streamline training for aviation specialists, as well as providing other operational benefits. The principal advantages of employing CBS include: • improved safety (during training and incident operations) • overall improvements in training andin operational procedures, leading to improved effectiveness and efficiency inuse of aerial means (with associated cost savings) • the ability to train for emergency scenarios that would be unsafe to practice inthe real- world • providing an accessible way for specialists such as COPAR to practice and maintain skills ata variety of locations, without requiring useof real aircraft • increased capacity for management and supervision of aerial means (and therefore increased flexibility to respond to large or complex events). Properly designed CBS may be used for: • aptitude testing and candidate selection • initial training • training forin-flight emergencies • extension training, for example: large airtanker supervision • task specialist specific training – for example: tech-aided intelligence gathering, incendiary machine operation, useof night vision equipment • assessment • remedial training andre-assessment • skills maintenance and practice • re-certification. CBS will also provide benefits for: • development and testing of systems, procedures (including emergency procedures), operating practices and doctrine • interagency collaboration and cooperation including resource sharing • preparation for international deployment • diversity and inclusion (by making training more accessible). A high-quality simulation capability is already available at Portugal’s Escola Nacional de Bombeiros (ENB). A comprehensive, collaborative simulation capability is available atthe Sistema de Entrenamiento Integrado de Lucha Antiincendios Forestales (SEILAF) facility in Seville, Spain. In addition, French agencies operate a variety of dedicated aviation and incident control simulation facilities, including at CESIR7 in Valabre in France andat the Securite Civile Air Means base in Nimes. 7 https://www.valabre.com/prestations/cesir
Itis most important to recognise that high-fidelity simulation isnot necessarily required. Many aviation-related training outcomes can now be provided by simple, lower cost simulation facilities that canbe readily made available at locations such as agency offices, Air Means Centres and Air Operator bases, or even in private homes. This includes simulation that employs Virtual Reality (VR) technology. Simulation facilities can also be portable or mobile. Akey feature of modern simulation facilities is that they canbe easily networked. Asa simple example, this would allow a COPAR-Arto practice coordination scenarios with firebombing pilots who are at completely different locations – even onthe other side ofthe world. High-quality off-the-shelf software, specifically designed for training and practice in aerial firefighting, is also now available. Recommendation 40: Portugal should initiate a collaborative project to develop a cohesive plan for the appropriate incorporation of Computer Based Simulation into training and skills maintenance programs for specialists who manage, coordinate supervise and support aerial operations; and for users of aerial means. Note: Illustration: Securite Civile firebombing simulation and training facility, Nimes, France. This image shows the facility being used to develop and test standard operating procedures to support international resource sharing. Illustration: example of simple, networked simulation facilities being used for COPAR training in Canada Image: Alberta Forest Service Illustrations: example oflow-cost, portable (trailer-mounted), networked simulation facilities being used for COPAR training in Australia.
10 Research and development 10.1 Economic research Most respondents considered that the total level of investment in aerial firefighting in Portugal was generally inthe order of magnitude that would be expected. However it would be reasonable tosay that this view is based to some degree on judgement, andby comparing Portugal to jurisdictions with similar rural fire risks. These other jurisdictions also base investment decisions, at least partly, on judgement and experience. Inthe future, especially asthe rural fire risk develops and changes, it would be advantageous for investment decisions tobe underpinned by formal, targeted research into the economic costs that are incurred and the benefits that are generated through supporting rural fire management with aerial means. This type of economic research is also likely to inform related decision-making processes, such as matching resources to risk, and decisions around fleet typology, numbers and placement. Economic research will also be fundamental tothe development of decision- support tools. There isno doubt that economic research inthe field of fire management, and aerial fire management in particular, canbe difficult and may be resource intensive. Economic research into aerial firefighting in other countries has evidenced some of these challenges. Acquiring good quality, consistent data from actual events is problematic, often requiring dedicated collection teams. Measuring and attributing the effect of aerial means isnot straightforward, as they often operate in support of other means. In most jurisdictions, the major costs associated with aerial means are incurred by making resources available at short notice. There is therefore an “insurance” element tothe economics of employing aerial means, where the benefits canbe difficult to quantify. Intangible and collateral benefits are also involved – for example: the provision of community confidence in firefighting efforts is often regarded asa benefit of deploying aerial means, whether ornot they are being effective in suppressing the fire. An example of collateral benefits is that a firefighting aircraft may also provide crucial intelligence tothe incident control team. Despite the challenges for economic research on aerial firefighting, some countries have made good progress and there isnow a body of literature that will help to guide appropriate data collection and research. Recent advances in automated data collection and data management are also helpful. Improvements in computer modelling of fire spread and damage now readily allow testing of different levels and types of investment in fire control measures. Economic research requires bringing together experts from various different disciplines, and must be conducted asa collaborative exercise. In Portugal, research into the cost and benefits of aerial firefighting will necessarily bea long-term project. However itis important to commence the design ofthe research atan early stage, so that the data that will be required canbe identified. This will also inform the proposed data collection and management project (refer to Section 9.2), and enable the appropriate data sets tobe established.
10.2 Airborne intelligence gathering As described earlier, aircraft provide critical information for incident management teams to plan fire control strategy and tactics and for communities threatened by rural fires to make appropriate decisions regarding their safety. Information from airborne platforms can also be crucial fora range of other purposes including, for example: • fire detection • ensuring safety of ground firefighters • directing resources • regional and national situation awareness and resource allocation • post-incident analysis, debriefing and continuous improvement • fire cause analysis • maintaining records, including legal records. In simple terms, provision of good quality information isone ofthe most important roles that canbe undertaken by aircraft. Some jurisdictions around the world now place greater emphasis on providing airborne Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance (ISR) capability for rural fires than onair attack capability. Portugal is well aware ofthe importance of using aerial platforms for ISR. Current initiatives include, for example: • equipping an AVRAC with visible and infrared sensors and automated digital image processing and mapping capability (an upgraded, downward-looking sensor is planned tobe trialled during 2023) • a simple system for routinely acquiring, transmitting and processing images of fire events from HERAC and AVRAC, via mobile (cell) phones • useof FAP-operated Type 2 (medium) UAVs for fire detection (surveillance) • useof a range ofGNR-GIPS, ANEPC and fire brigade owned multi-rotor UAVs for intelligence gathering. On occasions, anFAP P3 Orion with specialist sensors has also been engaged in fire surveillance and mapping. Based on experience in other countries, further developments that could be considered, include: Recommendation 41: Portugal should initiate a long-term project to design and conduct economic research into the use of aerial means to support rural fire management, including a benefit-cost study. Note: itis important that the design phase be completed as soon as practicable, in order that appropriate data acquisition can commence.
• provision of gimballed infrared and visible sensors on HERAC or other dedicated light helicopters, with onboard image processing and air-ground data communication systems, to assist both with coordination ofair means andto provide intelligence and information products to ground-based incident management teams and firefighters (refer also to Section 8.6) • extending, and further automating, the existing image capture system to every aircraft (“a camera on every aircraft”) • installing broad area, downward looking infrared and visible spectrum mapping equipment ina fast, IFR (all-weather) turbine or twin-engine aeroplane to provide rapid, automated mapping of large fires or multiple fires spread around the country. Recommendation 42: Portugal should continue to place a very high priority on researching, developing and implementing appropriate, additional airborne Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance (ISR) capability for rural fires. Illustrations: Simple examples of processed images of rural fires from downward looking sensors, automatically incorporated into agency information systems. The two examples onthe left compare an image ofthe same fire from visible sensors (top) with an image from infra-red sensors (lower). Illustration: Further example of processed images of rural fires from downward looking sensors incorporated into agency systems. In this case, the imagery has been used asa starting point to computer model anticipated fire spread.
Appendix 1 Operational and technical issues A1.1 Introduction A number of matters were identified during the project that were considered tobe ofan operational or technical nature and therefore outside the scope ofthe main project report. The project considered that itwas important that these operational or technical issues were still recorded and presented tothe appropriate agencies and institutions, inan interim Supplementary Report. This Appendix summarises and updates the interim Supplementary Report on technical and operational issues. Itis important to emphasise that the list of operational and technical matters reported isnot comprehensive or exhaustive. The strategic analysis project did not aimto identify all operational and technical issues. Only those matters that happened tobe identified during the analysis project are listed. Itis suggested that the topics listed in this report could be considered for inclusion inthe Lessons Learned system that is proposed inthe main project report. This report makes some suggestions for resolving the issues listed, plus some additional comments. These are based on feedback from respondents who were interviewed or consulted during project research, andon experience gained in other countries. A1.2 Operational and technical issues 1. Limited availability of national air-ground radio channels (safety issue) Description: When multiple aircraft are engaged atan incident, a national VHF-AM radio frequency is allocated for air-ground-air communications. Itis understood that four such frequencies were available in 2022. However, with only a limited number of frequencies available, there isa high probability that transmissions from airborne aircraft associated with one incident will interfere with radio traffic at another incident. This may lead to confusion and has the potential to adversely affect safety. Suggestions: are only relevant to technical and operational matters, and are suggested options for addressing the issues raised, mainly based on feedback from respondents andon experience with similar issues in other jurisdictions. They are suggestions only, for consideration bythe responsible agencies. They are not necessarily firm recommendations. Responsible agencies maybe aware of other options for resolving these issues.
Comment: This issue was consistently reported by many respondents from different agencies and Air Operators. 2. Radio communication discipline (safety issue) Description: Inefficient and excessive radio traffic onVHF-AMand FM channels used for air-ground communications at rural fires. Comment: This issue was consistently reported by many respondents from different agencies and Air Operators. Most respondents considered that inefficient and excessive useof radio communication was significantly affecting efficiency and effectiveness of aerial operations. Itmay also result in safety issues, if channels are not clear to communicate regarding urgent situations. Suggestions: 1.1 Reserve additional national VHF-AM radio channels for air-ground-air radio communications; and1.2 Review procedures for allocation of radio channels to incidents to reduce the probability of interference. Consider national coordination of channel allocation. (Refer also to recommendations ofthe main report ofthe strategic analysis project to consider implementation ofa rostered National Air Coordination role or national AirDesk. These roles would include monitoring and national allocation of radio channels); and1.3 Promote the use of available FM radio channels for air-ground communications, to reduce the load on each VHF-AM frequency. Note: ANEPC has advised that dueto the implementation ofsub-regional commands, new procedures for frequency allocation will apply from 2023; and that authorisation touse additional VHF-AM frequencies is being sought from the relevant authorities. Suggestions: 2.1 Provide additional training in radio communication best-practice for ground personnel such as: firefighters, crew leaders, local Commanders, Incident Commanders, and COPAR-terra. (Note: refer also to recommendations ofthe main report ofthe strategic analysis project regarding training and micro- qualifications for COPAR); and/or2.2 Issue operational directives that restrict useof some radio channels to personnel that have received the relevant training or micro-qualification; and/or2.3. Consider allocating additional, dedicated VHF-AMand FM channels for air- ground radio communications; and/or2.4 Consider appropriate technological options for reducing communications load and interference onFM channels, for example: trunking, encoding or selective- calling.
3. Radio call-sign duplication (safety issue) Description: Some international aircraft that operate in border zones oras part ofEU mutual aid arrangements may use the same radio call-sign as aircraft based in Portugal. This can lead to confusion and could increase the risk of aircraft collision. Comment: This issue was noted by several different respondents as contributing toa “near-miss” onat least one occasion. It potentially applies to aircraft sent from several European countries including France and Spain. The issue may also potentially apply to Portugal- based aircraft that are called to provide firefighting support in other countries. Itis possible that, in-part, this issue maybe exacerbated by differing procedures inthe different Spanish autonomous regions (refer also to Item 4). 8; 4. PT-ES Border Zone operational procedures Description: There is some lack of clarity about the extent ofthe PT-ES 25km mutual aid Border Zone, and the operational procedures that apply in that zone. Comment Respondents strongly supported the concept ofthe agreed Portugal-Spain Border Zone that efficiently allows aircraft from both countries to conduct aerial firefighting within 25km ofthe international border. However many respondents were not clear about the actual extent ofthe agreed Border Zone. Many respondents were also concerned that operational communications and coordination procedures in different parts ofthe Zone maybe different, depending on which Spanish Autonomous Region is involved. Some respondents also expressed concern that the current procedures required each country 8 Draft Guidelines published by IFAWG may assist with developing agreed procedures, see: http://www.ifawg.net/information/ifawg-fire-aviation-guidelines-part-2-new/co-7-1-international- deployments/ Suggestions: 3.1 Review procedures for European international mutual aid operations to ensure that there isa process for identifying duplicate radio call-signs during briefings and information exchange before any aircraft enters Portugal, including inthe PT-ES 25km border zones, or where Portuguese-based aircraft may operate in other countries8. Assign appropriate alternative call-signs for the relevant period of operations; and3.2In the longer term, collaborate within theEU to develop whole-of-Europe standards for international sharing of aerial firefighting resources, including standardising radio call-signs. Note: refer also to recommendations ofthe main report ofthe strategic analysis project to consider enhancing formal co-operation with Spain, including the possibility ofa Technical Committee or similar mechanism that would work to resolve this type of issue.
to notify the other country if their aircraft cross the international border, however these procedures were not always followed. 5. Operation of Mode S transponders in firefighting aircraft Description: Some respondents reported that although radar transponders are currently required inall firefighting aircraft, they are not necessarily required to operate in Mode S. There isa consistent view amongst respondents that operation of transponders in Mode S should be required. Explanatory note: All firefighting aircraft in Portugal are required tobe equipped with radar transponders. When operating in Mode C, the transponder superimposes aircraft altitude data on signals transmitted from the aircraft. When operating in Mode S, the transponder superimposes additional data about the aircraft, including aircraft identification data, on signals transmitted from the aircraft. In very simple terms, this improves the functionality and reliability of collision risk reduction, traffic awareness and situation awareness systems. All modern transponders are capable of Mode C, and most are capable of Mode S. Some aircraft may require upgraded transponders ifuse of Mode Sis mandated. Comment: Most other countries that routinely engage aircraft for firefighting require Mode C transmissions. Many countries have implemented a requirement for Mode Sor arein the process of implementation. Note: “firefighting aircraft” may include UAV (drones). Small, lightweight Mode S transponders are available for UAV. Requiring Mode S transponders onUAV could decrease risks of collision. Useof Mode Smay increase the visibility of aircraft to members ofthe public with suitable receiving equipment, andin publicly available tracking systems, for example: Flight Radar24 or FlightAware. Most countries consider that the advantages of increased electronic visibility of aircraft outweigh any possible disadvantages. Suggestions: 4.1 Publish and widely distribute a clear operational directive or equivalent document (in Portuguese and English) that describes the Border Zone and the applicable, agreed procedures and responsibilities for aerial operations (refer also to Observation 5of the main report); and4.2 Continue to liaise with Spanish authorities regarding clarification of procedures that apply inthe relevant Spanish autonomous regions. Note: Spanish authorities are aware of different procedures applicable in Spanish Autonomous Regions and are currently working ona project that aims to align procedures within Spain. Refer also to Recommendations ofthe main report ofthe strategic analysis project to consider enhancing formal co-operation with Spain, including the possibility ofa Technical Committee or similar mechanism).
6. Consistent bucket-hook-up procedures Description: HEBL from different Air Operators have different procedures for EHATI/BHATI crews to attach the bucket tothe helicopter cargo hook, orto deploy the bucket from the cargo basket. (This may also apply to HEBM, although this was not able tobe confirmed). Comment: Training and briefing would be simplified and safety improved by having a consistent procedure. Some respondents preferred a procedure that would avoid team members standing under a hovering helicopter. 7. Head protection for EHATI crew leaders (safety issue) Description: When aboard HEBL, normally inthe front left-hand seat, the leader ofan EHATI (usually GIPS personnel) is required touse a communications headset to provide intercom communication with the pilot. This requires removal ofthe crew leader’s firefighting safety helmet during the flight. The EHATI team leader is then the only person onthe helicopter that isnot wearing head protection while the helicopter is operating ina relatively high-risk, low-level environment. Suggestions: 5.1At a minimum, explicitly require all aircraft involved in firefighting tobe equipped with Mode C transponders and require that transponders be operated in Mode C during firefighting operations; and5.2FAP and ANEPC further investigate the costs and benefits of requiring Mode S transponders; and, if appropriate, implement a requirement for Mode S transponders inall firefighting aircraft, anda requirement to operate in Mode S during firefighting operations. This may necessitate providing advance notice toAir Operators to allow them time to upgrade aircraft equipment. Suggestions: 6.1In consultation with Air Operators, research and design an appropriate standard operating procedure for attaching buckets to helicopter cargo hooks, orfor deploying a bucket that is already attached tothe hook, from the cargo basket; and6.2 Include the standard operating procedure inthe relevant Operations Manuals and operational directives, and training programs.
8. Megaphones and sirens for HEBL, HEBM and HERAC Description: Some respondents considered that there would be benefit in equipping all HEBL and HEBM used inair attack, and HERAC, with a public address (megaphone) and siren system to: • warn people onthe ground of impending drops (using the siren); and • improve options for communication with people onthe ground, including to provide warnings orto initiate evacuations. Comment: This type of equipment isa standard requirement in many other countries that engage helicopters for firefighting. 9. Useof aircraft in mopping up operations Description: A number of respondents expressed concern at what is perceived tobe excessive useof firebombing aircraft to dispense water for “mopping-up” or “blacking out” operations, which should ideally be conducted by ground personnel. Comment: This issue has also been observed in many other countries. In some countries, itmay be related toa lack of ground personnel available for mopping upor blacking outa fire. Suggestions: 7.1 Require relevant Air Operators to provide an additional flight helmet with integrated communications (installed microphone and headphones) in each helicopter that delivers EHATI; or7.2 Issue all EHATI crew leaders with a suitable flight helmet that includes integrated communications. Suggestion: 8.1 ANEPC and FAP investigate the feasibility, costs and benefits of requiring public address (megaphone) and siren systems onany orall of HEBL, HEBM, HEBP and HERAC; and, if appropriate, implement a requirement.
10. Training opportunities for firefighter teams and pilots atCMA Description: Arrangements at some CMAs often provide little orno opportunities for EHATI/BHATI and pilots to undertake joint training exercises andto build relationships, especially atthe start ofa fire season or Phase, or after a change of pilot or GIPS team. Comment: Many respondents expressed a general desire for additional training opportunities to assist with building trust and relationships, andto maintain skills. Structured, local pre-season or early-season training exercises could also involve and improve relationships with ATA helicopter and aeroplane pilots, COPAR and with other ANEPC personnel, Fire Brigades and ICNF personnel that are based nearby. Pre-season or early-season training exercises could be dual-purpose, for example they could be used to identify, map and check the condition of water points, landing sites and scooping sites andto update databases. Training exercises could also integrate with TRM training (refer to Item 11, onthe next page). Suggestions: 9.1 ANEPC consider issuing an operational directive that restricts useof aircraft for mopping-upand blacking outto those situations where aircraft are clearly more efficient or cost effective than ground personnel. Refer also to recommendations ofthe main report ofthe to consider implementation ofa rostered National Air Coordination role (NAC) or national AirDesk. These roles could include monitoring and approval ofthe useof aircraft for mopping-upand blacking out, when appropriate. 9.2 Ensure that the respective training programs for Incident Commanders and COPAR fully explain the costs and risks of utilising aircraft in mopping up operations. Suggestions: 10.1 Design suitable standard, structured pre-season or early-season training exercises; and10.2 Arrange helicopter contract specifications so that helicopters are required to arrive at their designated CMA some days before commencing duty, to allow for training exercises; and/or10.3 Arrange helicopter contract specifications so that the fixed components ofthe contract price include provision of some operating hours for training exercises; and/or10.4 Identify separate, dedicated funding for “live” training exercises.
11. Team Resource Management training Description: Several respondents commented onthe value of Team Resource Management (TRM) training in improving safety and efficiency of aerial operations. Explanatory note: TRMis a variation of Crew Resource Management (CRM) training. CRM training normally only applies to aircraft crew, whereas TRM trains multi-disciplinary groups to work asa team andto use all available resources to assure safety and effectiveness. Topics usually covered inTRM include: Human Factors, Threat and Error Management and Effective Communication. Comment: TRM training has proven tobe very valuable in other countries, especially for specialised firefighting crews that work directly with pilots (e.g. EHATI/BHATI) and for COPAR functions. An effective TRM training program canbe delivered in less than one day. 12. Updating of water point databases Description: Many respondents expressed some frustration that the database of water points that are suitable for use by helicopters was not always accurate and was not routinely updated for each summer fire season. Some respondents were not aware of procedures for providing updated information. Comment: High-quality, accurate prior information regarding available water can significantly improve the efficiency and effectiveness of response to fires. Suggestion: 11.1FAP, ANEPC and GNR collaborate to investigate the feasibility of introducing a requirement for TRM training for pilots, GIPS teams and all COPAR. Suggestions: 12.1 Implement formal procedures that require the responsible agencies and institutions to survey water points prior to each season andto submit updated data; and/or12.2 Include surveys of water points inpre-season/early season training exercises; (refer to Item 10, above); and12.3 Provide a simple system (e.g. aweb form orApp) to enable pilots and GIPS/ANEPC/Fire Brigade personnel to provide updated data andto report issues with water points.
13. Adequate water points for helicopters Description: Some respondents considered that there were insufficient designated, safe water points for helicopters (HEBL, HEBM, HEBP) in some regions ofthe country – possibly leading to longer turnaround times and inefficient delivery of water to fires. Comment Understanding of this issue would be improved by ensuring a current, fully updated database of water points is available (refer to Item 12on the previous page). 14. Notifications to ANAC orNAV Description: Several respondents noted that when firefighting operations are conducted inthe vicinity of airports or other designated airspace, itis important that early notification is provided to ANAC and/orNAV to ensure that appropriate airspace management procedures are implemented. Early notification will minimise the risk of disruption to firefighting aircraft and commercial passenger traffic. Comment: This issue also arises in other countries. Most countries acknowledge that there will always be situations where itis most appropriate for the first pilot who arrives atan incident to provide an initial notification of aerial firefighting activity to relevant airspace management authorities and, if required, seek clearance to operate. Some countries have implemented a centralised process for operational liaison with airspace management authorities, viaa National Air Coordinator (NAC) or AirDesk or equivalent. A centralised process may have advantages and disadvantages, especially inthe early stages ofan aerial firefighting operations. Inany case there is always a responsibility for all aerial firefighting pilots to ensure that they are operating with required clearances. Suggestions: 13.1 Ensure that the water point database is updated, and kept up-to-date; and13.2 When the database has been updated, analyse the data to determine if there are gaps that should be addressed; and13.3 Provide a simple system (e.g. aweb form orApp) to enable pilots and GIPS/ANEPC/Fire Brigade personnel to report gaps in water point coverage. Suggestions: 14.1 Remind all firefighting pilots of their obligations to seek appropriate airspace clearances, ifno other procedures have been implemented atthe time; and14.2 Further liaise with ANAC and NAV to define additional procedures, if required, that ensure that appropriate notification is provided to ANAC and/orNAV; and14.3 Ensure that training for all pilots and COPAR includes identification of designated airspace, and procedures for notifying ANAC and/orNAV of aerial firefighting activity when appropriate.
15. Useof FAPP3 for surveillance Description: Some respondents advised that FAP has occasionally supplied aP-3 Orion for surveillance and intelligence gathering duties, during large or escalating situations. Some respondents expressed a view that, when deployed, theP-3 could be better integrated into firefighting and emergency management systems. Suggestion: 15.1GNR, FAP and ANEPC collaborate to develop standard procedures for deployment ofthe P-3 aircraft at emergency events, which ensure that: i. information gathered is efficiently delivered into appropriate information systems; andii. P-3 crews are fully briefed regarding communications procedures for operating inthe vicinity of rural fires and other emergencies; and iii. other firefighting pilots are informed regarding P3 flights in their vicinity.
Appendix 2 Consultation Aerial firefighting in Portugal hasa large range and diverse range of stakeholders. Many agencies, institutions and individuals arein a position to offer valuable contributions and insights. Itwas not practical for all stakeholders tobe directly consulted. Asfar as practicable, the project consulted with a representative group of stakeholders. Some interest groups also declined tobe consulted, or declined tobe listed as Respondents. Most directly consulted Respondents were interviewed by project team members. In some cases, Respondents completed a structured Questionnaire. For some Respondents listed below, consultations have occurred with more than one representative, branch or cell ofthe listed agency or institution. Also, multiple consultations may have occurred with the listed individual, agency or institution. Respondents directly consulted include: oMDN o ANEPC, including FEPC oFAP oGNR, including GIPS o AGIF o ANAC o ICNF o Judiciary Police o AFOCELCA o Helibravo oHTA Helicopters o Shamrock o Babcock (now Avincis) Portugal o Babcock (now Avincis) Spain o Agro-Montiar o Municipality of Leiria o Viseu Airport o GeoTrack o Ministry for Ecological Transition and Demographic Challenge (MITECO), Spain
