- actors, information sources and possible future collaboration A comprehensive Swedish database for forest and land fires FOREST REPORT Anders Granström Department of Forest Ecology and Management, SLU, 90183 Umeå No. 1 2023
Forest Report 2023:1 Publisher: Department of Forest Ecology and Management, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences. Responsible publisher: Göran Ericsson, Dean, Faculty of Forestry, SLU. Text editing: Ylva Melin, SLU. Graphic design: Michael Kvick, SLU. Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Umeå. 27 pages. Publication year: 2023, Umeå. When citing, please state: Granström, A. 2023. A comprehensive Swedish database for fires in forests and land - actors, information sources and possible future collaboration. Rapport Skog 2023:1. Author: Anders Granström, Department of Forest Ecology and Management, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences. Cover photo: Anders Granström, SLU. ISBN:978-91-8046-815-2 (electronic), 978-91-8046-814-5 (printed) Layout: Graphic service, SLU.
Deputy Director, SLU Forest Damage Center I would like to thank workshop participants and government representatives for valuable information on existing initiatives and for comments onan earlier version of this report: Frida Carlstedt and Lennart Svensson, Swedish Forest Agency; Christer Björkman, Umeå Region Fire Service; Erik Hellberg-Meschaks and Sandra Wennberg, Swedish Environmental Protection Agency; Håkan Berglund, SLU Species Data Bank; Kristofer Wester, Holmen Skog AB; Andreas Garpebring, Västerbotten County Administrative Board; Henrik von Stedingk, FSC; Leif Sandahl and Joakim Ekberg MSB; Johan Sjöström RISE; Henrik Persson SLU and Anders Esselin, Västerbotten Forest Program. Thanks also to Inka Bohlin, analyst atSLU Forest Damage Center, for final review ofthe report. Anders Granstrom Coordinator SLU Environmental Analysis Program Forest Wiebke Neumann Sivertsson Anna-Lena Axelsson, Over the past 20 years, the issue ofa coherent fire database has been raised several times by various stakeholders anda number of smaller investigations have been carried out, including atthe initiative ofthe Swedish Environmental Protection Agency1 . However, these initiatives have not led toany concrete action plan. In connection with the establishment ofthe SLU Forest Damage Center in 2021, a proposal was made to review the issue again, and Anders Granström atthe Department of Forest Ecology and Management was given the assignment, which was carried outin collaboration with the SLU Environmental Analysis Program Forest and the National Forest Data Lab. Inmid-October 2021, a workshop was held in Umeå with representatives from nine organizations with a potential interest inthe issue. This report is based, among other things, on contributions during that day, andis intended asa basis for further discussion between the relevant authorities, aiming fora functional, comprehensive database of Swedish vegetation fires. Forest Ecology and Management, SLU, Umeå. anders.granstrom@slu.se1 Tack Preface Berglund, H. 2015. National IT solution for data on forest fire fields – data sources, flows and costs. PM, Artdatabanken, SLU.
3. Whyis a national fire database needed, and who requests the information? 177 203.3 Forest certification 3.4 Landowners 3.5 Insurance companies 3.6 Swedish Forest Agency 3.7 National statistical production for climate reporting 3.8 Research 2426 514 2022 11 Summary 1917 4A possible future structure 4.2 Maintenance fires 4.3 General requests for map interface 4.4 Conclusions Preface 86 1520 233 2119 1419 1. Background 124.1 Wildfires 215. References Summary 2.1. Rescue services and MSB 2.2 Registration of data with SOS-alarm 2.3The Swedish Forest Agency's fire mapping 2.4 Satellite monitoring of fires within theEU 2.5The Swedish Environmental Protection Agency and the county administrative boards 2.6 Forest companies and other large landowners 182. How does data collection on wildfires and maintenance fires work today? 83.1 Rescue services, MSB and county administrative boards 3.2 Nature conservation Content
For every wildfire and maintenance fire, there should be information about the prevailing weather and fire risk index is linked. This information canbe retrieved viaan automatic function at SMHI, provided that the time and position are known. With the help of other already available geographical information (forest condition, soil type, etc.), it will then be possible to quantify what has burned, for what reasons, and what the result was. Not least inthe perspective of future climate change, this needs tobe monitored over time. afew large land managers (county administrative boards, forestry companies, the church, the Swedish Fortification Agency, the Swedish Property Agency), so there should beno major problem in agreeing on working routines. Despite the fact that the issue has been raised several times over the past 20 years, there is still no comprehensive database of wildfires and management fires that have occurred inthe country, which is unfortunate for both fire protection and nature conservation. This report examines whyit is important to have credible statistics inthe area, what data collection is done today, and how a national fire database could be created. In order for this fire database tobe implemented, various stakeholders must agree ona design anda suitable contractor. Itis likely that the Swedish Forest Agency will bethe contractor, as they have a well- functioning mapping service with relevant background information and are already mapping major fires. The fire database's information on wildfires should primarily be obtained from the incident reports that, according to current regulations, are submitted centrally tothe Swedish Civil Contingencies Agency (MSB) after the operation has been completed. However, the incident reports need tobe changed so that the starting position ofthe fire anda shape file for the outer boundary canbe included. This information canbe added bythe rescue service personnel inthe field, provided that small modifications are made tothe software that the rescue services use. In addition, the MSB requirement specification regarding the incident report needs tobe changed. Information about completed management fires (date of execution anda shapefile for the outer boundary) canbe conveniently obtained from the respective land manager. Management burns (nature conservation burns and burns for other purposes) are almost exclusively carried outby Summary
Summary In order fora fire database tobe realized, various actors must unite around a concept and determine whois to manage it. The Swedish Forest Agency might bethe prime candidate, since they have a well-functioning public map service and since they already undertake a basic mapping of larger burnt forest areas. Information on wildfires could most easily be retrieved from the Incident reports that are sent toMSB (The Swedish civil contingencies agency) after completion of each wildfire incident, and which in their present form contain valuable data. The structure of these reports would however have tobe modified to include also coordinates for the starting point anda shape-file delineating the perimeter ofthe burnt area, information that the suppression personnel can retrieve before leaving the site. be linked to each wildfire and management fire. This can easily be done through an automatic routine atthe weather service (SMHI), given that day and position of each event is known. Once these basic pieces of information (time, point of origin, geographical extent, cause, weather and fire danger indices) is available inthe database, external geo-information such as fuel type, forest volume etc. canbe associated bythe user fora range of analyses. A permanent and detailed da-tabase will be central for both long-term biomo-nitoring and wildfire risk assessments, and will beof general interest, not least inthe perspective of climate change. Current weather and fire danger indices should A national database for wildfires and management fires - actors, sources of information and potential future cooperation Despite discussions over the last 20 years, there is still no database over wildfires and management fires in Sweden, which hampers both fire protec-tion and nature conservation. This report details the need for accurate statistics in this area, the cur-rent status of relevant data sources and potential design ofa national wildland fire database. Information on management fires (date anda shape-file for the perimeter) can most easily be obtained directly from the land managers perfor-ming prescribed fires, near- exclusively afew large entities (forest companies, the Swedish Church, Nature reserve managers, the military). A routine for delivering data should be agreed onby allof these.
1. Background the effects were etcetera (Figure 1) cannot be answered with the statistical collection that is done today. A comprehensive fire database would therefore beof national interest for both fire protection and nature conservation. numbers because fire was then a real threat to forest resources, but the collection only applied to state forests. From the beginning ofthe 1940s, the fire service also began to collect statistics onits efforts, but interest varied over time and during the period 1980-1996, no registration was actually made atall. Even today, the forest protection aspect isan important reason for collecting statistics, but there is also an interest from nature conservation to follow the extent of wildfires. Andin addition, alot of land is actively burned asa nature conservation measure, which makes it necessary to distinguish inthe statistics. So questions about where it burned, for what reasons, which Many people take itfor granted that a country as developed as Sweden today has solid statistics onhow much forest land burns per year, and what changes inthe number of fires and burned area have occurred over time. This isnot the case. After the fires of 2018, for example, the question constantly came up whether these were the worst in100 years? Yes, probably, but you can'tbe sure. In fact, the first attempt to collect forest fire statistics was made inthe late 1800s. Not least in light of ongoing climate change, itis important to continuously monitor damage to forests, and fires areof course oneof the causes of damage. A number of exploratory studies were started in 2021 atSLU's Forest Damage Center, oneof which was entitled 'Preliminary study on collaboration around data on burned forests'. In October 2021, a workshop was held atSLU, Umeå as part ofthe feasibility study with participation from 9 organizations: SLU, the Swedish Agency for Civil Protection and Emergency Preparedness (MSB), the Swedish Forest Agency, the Swedish Environmental Protection Agency, the SLU Species Data Bank, FSC-Sweden, the Västerbotten County Administrative Board, Region Västerbotten and Holmen Skog AB. During the workshop, the interests of various stakeholders, available data sources and opportunities for collaboration were discussed. This report is based, among other things, onthe discussion that took place there. Figure 1. Examples of questions that canbe asked about an individual fire object. The image is from a fire in Östergötland atthe endof April 2019. The total area was around 226.5ha and was determined in this particular case on site with GPS via a careful helicopter flight along the border. The MSB's intervention database (IDA) for this fire states that it affected 2265000 m2 (=226.5ha) 'productive forest land including clearing', while the three other land categories (see Fact Box1) are set to0 m2. Ascan be seen inthe image, this isnot correct, but the fire also spread over alot of open land, as well as wooded bog and open bog. Using a polygon for the spread ofthe fire and additional information from different GIS layers, itis possible to automatically answer most ofthe questions listed inthe image. Photo: Anders Granström.
The database has existed since 1996, but until recently itwas a voluntary commitment for municipalities to submit incident reports toit, which most municipalities followed. However, since 1/1/2021 ithas been a statutory requirement to submit the reports, and from 1/1/2022 ithas also been decided that they must be sent no later than two months after the operation has ended. For this reason, among other things, itis thought that the lag for reporting forest fires in particular maybe shorter than in Figure 2, since a large proportion ofthe country's forest fires are handled by part-time units. Onthe other hand, they occur during the summer, with holiday breaks that may have an opposite effect. A review ofthe situation carried outat the end of February 2022 shows that the median time for all reports of rescue operations overall was around four days, but that 10% of operations were not reported within 25 days ofthe event (Figure 2). Itis possible that the 'reporting speed' differs somewhat between full- time and part-time stations2 In accordance with the Swedish Accident Prevention Act (LSO 2003:778), forest and land fires are currently extinguished by municipal rescue services. The third chapter and tenth paragraph ofthe act states that “When a rescue operation is completed, the municipality shall ensure that the accident is investigated toa reasonable extent to clarify the causes ofthe accident, the course ofthe accident and how the operation has been carried out”. MSBis responsible for supporting and developing the municipal emergency services, and maintains a national database for all types of accidents. This report is made bythe operation leader after the operation has been completed inthe form ofan 'Incident Report', which is sent toMSB's statistics department. 2.1. Rescue services and MSB reporting to receive compensation3 2 . 3It canIt would be valuable to review the quality of reporting and potential for improvement for forest and land fires. There is much tobe desired, especially regarding the investigation of causes, as around a third ofall forest and land fires are noted as “cause unknown” (Sjöström and Granström 2020)! because they later have todo Information from Christer Björkman, Umeå Fire Department. 'Part-time stations' are not permanently staffed. Firefighters have their regular jobs near the station but must report at short notice inthe event ofan alarm. 'Full-time stations, with permanent staffing and full-time personnel, are only found in larger communities. The material applies toall operations inthe country during January 2022 and was selected on February 22by Joakim Ekberg, MSB. There were probably a number of operations atthe time for which the reports had not yet been received, asthe maximum time specified istwo months. Itmay therefore happen that Figure 2. How long does it take for incident reports tobe sent? Cumulative distribution ofthe time from the end ofthe operation tothe incident report being sent toMSB. The actual distribution for this month's efforts hadan even longer tail of late reports. 2. How does data collection on wildfires and maintenance fires work today? ,12 3
Fact Box1 lists a number ofthe data from MSB does not provide its own software forIT support within the Rescue Service, but each municipality or association of municipalities must purchase it themselves. The market is dominated bythe software DAEDALOS from Lunds programarkitekter AB. The system handles operational efforts as well as finances, personnel, etc. Daedalos is structured in modules and for each specific function there isa 'subscription cost' for the municipality. Part ofthe system is DAEDALOS RESPONSE, which isa mobile app with amap function for work inthe field, and which canbe used byall personnel inthe operation (Figure 3). A management support with a corresponding function isCS Atom, from the company CSSuite. Some information is transferred directly from logs made during the SOS operation, while other information must be added manually. The incident reports are therefore received byMSB electronically as soon asthe report is compiled. Mainly that the fire boundary is laid asa GPS loop, and that aGPS point isset where the fire is believed to have started. In this case, a poorly extinguished campfire ontop ofa mountain. Via the GPS loop, you automatically getan accurate indication ofhow large an area has burned, which is otherwise very difficult to assess on site. Photo: Anders Granström. Figure 3. Each intervention bythe rescue service is reported inan incident report, see Fact Box1. With fairly small modifications tothe instructions, the incident report could become much more informative asa basis fora fire database. MSB's regulations that are relevant to forest and land fires, and which therefore endup inthe incident report. A critical piece of information isof course the size ofthe burned area. Here, the area should be stated in square meters (!) for each of four categories: 1) Productive forest land including clearing, 2) Other wooded land, 3) Field or pasture land, 4) Other land without trees. Even correctly distinguishing between some of these four classes canbe difficult enough (see Figure 1), but the big problem is still assessing how large an area has burned. Experience shows that rescue service personnel have great difficulty making realistic area assessments inthe field. The tendency isfor the area tobe overestimated, often severely. Ina survey of21 burned areas in Central Norway, itwas found that the area for all but four areas had been overestimated and that the median value ofthe overestimation wasa full 3.3 times! (Engström 2000). Although the study was conducted more than 20 years ago, there is plenty of anecdotal evidence that this problem persists. Someone has even coined the term 'rescue hectare'. the report. of geographic information from the field, but minor adjustments must be made tothe software tobe able to forward the information into the event The basic information that the incident report should contain has been specified via MSB's regulations (MSBFS 2021.5 Regulations on investigation reports after municipal rescue operations). DAEDALOS hasan interface for producing the report, where the incident commander enters a large number of details after the operation has been completed. However, itis unknown which correction factor should be used today to convert to real hectares. So there is already a skeleton for collecting
Examples of information that, according toMSB's regulations, must be included inthe incident report after the operation has been completed. # Burned area upon arrival, or when the rescue service operation has ended, (m2 ) Information about the origin ofthe fire Object that first ignited. First 'object overall', where one choice is 'other'. Under 'other' there are12 choices, oneof which is 'Vegetation'. # Friction # Wasa fire banin effect atthe time ofthe fire? (yes, no, don't know) Times of alarms, decisions about rescue services, arrival atthe scene, completion of rescue services, etc. # Lightning strike After the arrival ofthe emergency services Forest and land fires (specific issues) Location (coordinates in Sweref 99) # Match or lighter Under 'Other', 9 options are listed, including: Describe the causes and course ofthe incident before the arrival ofthe emergency services (Free text). # Reignition of fire from previous rescue operation # Other fire or flame. # Hygges or nature conservation burning Original assessment of object that first ignited, heat source or main cause has been updated after investigation (ifso click 'yes') Wasit burning with flames when the emergency services arrived? (yes, no) # Other land without trees (m2 ). For example, open marshland, heathland or bare mountains. # Glow after burning or grilling Presumed main cause (choice between three main causes, plus 'could notbe assessed'). Ifthe main cause was 'human action', there isa follow-up question about assessment of intent. # Other wooded land (m2 ). For example, mountain forest, small forest areas in built-up areas, energy forest. # Field or pasture land (m2 ) # Gassvets Cause # Productive forest land including amenity (m2 ) Heat source. First, heat source overall, where there are4 choices, twoof which are relevant to fires in vegetation. Oneof these is 'Fire or flame' and another 'Other'. Under 'Fire or flame' 9 options are listed: # Cigarette, embers from cigarette or similar # Outdoor burning # Gas burner # Donot spark or ignite # Other heat source. FACTBOX 1
Small surveillance planes with a crew of pilot and scout. favorable conditions. When suspicious smoke is detected, SOSis notified and the fire is driven to verify and provide coordinates. The operation is often managed by local flying clubs butis funded bythe state via MSB. They run predetermined relatively large loops once or sometimes twice aday when there isa high fire risk. Itcan be assumed that the effective detection distance is100 miles or more during There isa boxto indicate helicopter assistance, butno estimate of scope or impact. 45 Experience shows that this is rarely done for forest and land fires. Alarms about forest fires come partly from the forest fire brigade5 and partly from the public who call 112. SOS creates a case and tries to locate the location as best as possible using all incoming information, often from several callers. The alarm operator follows apre-established protocol ('Index') to determine the type of fire and the degree of severity (Table 1). In addition tothe information listed in Fact Box1, the incident reports also contain alot of information about the total resources deployed inthe operation, but hardly anything about how the operation has developed over time orthe extent of external resources (landowners, volunteers, flying resources4 4 ). However, there is room toadd detailed descriptions ofthe process in free text ina few places. Experience has shown, however, that these are often brief, even after really large forest fires (Granström 2020). Inthe regulations specifying the investigation reports (MSBFS 2021:5), the fourth paragraph further states the following: “Ifthe municipality assesses that further investigation is needed forto supplement the basic information according to paragraph 3 regarding the causes ofthe accident, the course ofthe accident orhow the intervention has been carried out, the documentation of each such investigation constitutes a separate part ofthe investigation report. 2.2 Registration of data atSOS-alarm There are therefore requests inthe legislation foran in- depth analysis (so-called §4 investigation) when serious incidents have occurred, but the assessment of whether this has been the case lies with the municipality. Parenthetically, itcan be mentioned that the worst mis- estimations could be filtered outby a simple comparison with the number ofman-hours spent onthe operation. When they donot follow a reasonable relationship, itis probably the area that ismis-estimated and not the number ofman- hours. Overflight bythe fire brigade orthe first arriving rescue team, coordinates are set for the event. It happens that the same event receives more than one position indication, but then you can filter them out afterwards, although this does not always happen. Some basic information such as time of alarm, arrival atthe location of various units, etc. will come later. Table 1. So-called 'Index' for forest and land fires, i.e. the information that the alarm operator atSOS tries to extract from the caller in order tobe able to dimension the alarm from the relevant rescue service, i.e. how much force should be sent. Note that 'football field' is used here, which is also the usual area measurement for forest fires in journalism. When the position is confirmed, not infrequently ata Forest fire Detected fire/smoke development Low Means Incandescent fire, no visible flames. Incident, post-inspection Alarm level Incandescent fire, no visible flames. Incident, post-inspection Detected fire/smoke development Low Type of fire Characteristics Fire outdoors High Fire threatening building High Grass fire Area > football field or small fire threatening building Means
The Swedish Forest Agency has long carried outan annual check of fellings via 'change detection' in satellite imagery, among other things to detect unreported felling. 76 Rakel (Radiocommunication for effective management) isa government network for radio communications. There is usually one Rakel unit per vehicle, but there are also a number of loose, handheld units. The largest fires had also been photographed from the air and the mapping was then done from these (Ängra, Enskogen, Nötberget, Storbrättan, Fågelsjö, Trängslet). The course ofthe operation is saved bySOS, which makes it possible to replay the event much later. The rescue service personnel themselves cannot access this information afterwards. However, itis written into the alarm agreement that SOS alarm shall assist the rescue service with this in cases where the municipality wants to carry outan 'enhanced' investigation into an event, i.e. a '§4 investigation' (see above). Since forest fires are dynamic over time and space and are rarely logged carefully bythe rescue service itself, this isa unique source for post-analysis ofthe event, butis not usually used, not even after major forest fires. 2.3The Swedish Forest Agency's fire mapping During the exceptional summer of fires in 2018, it became obvious that a solid area estimate was needed ofhow much had burned and where. The Swedish Forest Agency then took the initiative tomap the fires using satellite scenes (Sentinel-2), or, where applicable, aerial images. The work was carried out during the late summer and autumn of 2018 by several officials who had experience with image interpretation for other purposes, primarily clearing mapping7 66 . The goal wasto use all ofthe MSB's incident reports that stated an area of over 0.5ha, search for the correct position in cloud-free Sentinel scenes taken after the fire, verify that itwas a fire and add a shape file for the burned area. A number ofthe But SOS generates additional information during the operation. They login real time the position ofthe rescue service vehicles (with ID), as well as some 'loose' Rakel stations6 5 , which iswhy the commander's position can often be followed, even if they are moving inthe terrain. Similarly, the air resources hired byMSB (helicopters and water-bombing aircraft) are logged. This information canbe read inthe ResQmap map system inthe traffic room atSOS, but also inthe rescue service's command centers foras long asthe operation lasts. In recent years (2020-2022), the Swedish Forest Agency has continued along the established path of continuously mapping wildfire areas, andto some extent also management fires. They have then subscribed to alarms about fires in forests and land from SOS. The material has come from SOSin batches once a week and contained information about the alarm time (actually the time when the case was created), position and whether itwas a 'forest fire' or 'grass fire'. The classification of fire type is made bythe alarm operator andis oneof the pieces of information that the alarm operator requests initially (see Table 1). The information about these movements over time during to automatically land inthe incident report that the rescue leader writes after the operation is completed (see above). In addition tothe SOS alarms, they have also picked information about active fires from theUS fire monitoring system FIRMS (Fire Information for Resource Management System), which uses satellites to monitor the development of fires ona global scale. The system uses data from two different types of satellites: VIIRS and MODIS. The sensors on these register thermal radiation, which makes it possible to detect ongoing fires. There area couple of overflights per day. The pixel size is375 mfor VIIRS and almost 1km for MODIS, anda certain minimum radiation energy is needed within the pixel forit tobe noted asa fire (viaa detection algorithm, where various false signals must also be sorted out). Fires can therefore very well be missed; of course if they have only been active between two satellite passes, but also if they have been too small orlow-intensity tobe detected. From FIRMS come both wildfires and The information the Swedish Forest Agency retrieves from FIRMS isall 'hot pixels' that have been registered, which for larger fires canbe several. To make them easier to find bythe fire officer, the map program automatically draws a preliminary figure around the pixels. maintenance fires because satellite detection cannot distinguish between these. When itis a verified fire that does not have a nearby SOS alarm, the probability is high that itis a maintenance fire and the object is then registered as such. Potentially, it could occasionally happen that false alarms in connection with maintenance fires give rise to incorrect categorisation ofthe type of fire. Itis not entirely unusual for the emergency services to respond to alarms that turn outto be ongoing natural
Another wayto misregister is when a conservation burn leads toan actual rescue operation, either in connection with the burn, ora number of days later, asa result of insufficient post-extinguishment. Ifthe fire has then truly spread outside the original area, the burn consists of both a conservation burned area and The data from SOS and FIRMS are automatically entered into a specially developed ArcGIS application for verification and processing by handlers (one handler per region; North, Central, South). The handlers then go through alarm after alarm, search Sentinel scenes taken after the given alarm date and draw a polygon around the fire area, if such a thing canbe verified (in contrast topre- scenes, see Figure 4). Alarms that have been marked 'grass fire' have generally been ignored (despite the fact that fires that have been noted bySOS as 'grass fires' in connection with the alarm may well have subsequently spread to forest land). The information from SOS does not contain any area information andit is also not certain that itwas really a fire because false alarms are not filtered out. This means that many alarm points cannot be verified asa real fire. Burned areas must be over a certain size tobe reliably seen ina Sentinel scene, especially ifit isa dense forest. The pixel size is10–20 meters, depending onthe combination of wavelengths. It should also be borne in mind that the coordinates given bySOS canbe ata relatively large distance from the burned area, which makes it difficult to detect small fire fields. The SOS position is often taken from the rescue service vehicle bythe road and not outin the terrain atthe fire itself. The Swedish Forest Agency's goal has been to find and map all forest fires >0.5ha. A large number of real but small fires will therefore notbe registered in this mapping. partly an area that has been burned by wildfire. In such a case, the entire area will be registered asa wildfire, even ifthe wild part was only afew square meters, or perhaps remained entirely within the originally burned area, for example inthe form ofan active smoldering fire that ledto an alarm andan emergency call. In such cases, this leads to overreporting ofthe wildfire area. Inthe Forestry Board's mapping work, data is loaded The only wayto reliably distinguish between wildfires and management fires isto obtain specific information regarding the latter. The Swedish Forest Agency's officers have also tried to obtain information about completed management fires (position and date) through direct contact with forestry companies and county administrative boards, but with varying success. Ithas not been possible to investigate whether there isany screening function to remove such cases from the material sent from SOS. It should be borne in mind that nearly 90% ofall forest Figure 4. Example ofa fire area with drawn fire boundary (forest board'smap service), determined via interpretation of satellite scenes (Sentinel-2) taken before and after fire. The area is37 hain size andis located NEof Hamra National Park. The fire was started bya lightning strike and was reported on15/7.
9 Ahead ofthe 2022 fire season, the subscription was changed to cover the three months ofMay-July instead. 1210 813 Leif Sandahl, verbally. 11the fire period, although most ofthe area may well have burned oneor more days later. For maintenance fires detected via satellite, itis only possible to determine the dates between which the burning occurred ifyou donot see active fire ina Sentinel scene that happens tobe taken onthe dayof the burn. The information remained onthe EFFIS map page as late as February 2022. For wildfires, the alarm date, which isof course within Based onthe MSB's response database, i.e. area estimates bythe rescue service's commanders. Lennart Svensson, Swedish Forestry Agency, orally. 9 There area couple of different systems for registering management measures within nature reserves and national parks. Sentinel-2, at least for larger fire targets. EFFIS hasno mechanism whatsoever to distinguish between managed fires and wildfires. This means that all burned land ends upin the same bag and isa priori assumed tobe an unwanted fire. Especially for Sweden, where the area of managed burned land on average is possibly onpar with the area of wildfires, this leads to distorted statistics, which has been pointed outby the MSB13. 132.5The Swedish Environmental Protection Agency and the county administrative boards When a fire has been verified, itis directly placed onthe Swedish Forest Agency's public map service (subheading Forest damage/Forest fires). The fire limit for all fires registered bythe Swedish Forest Agency since 2018 is shown there inred dashes. By selecting different background scenes, such asthe latest aerial photo, a user canto some extent see the status ofthe forest within the area. However, itis not possible to directly find outin the map service which year/date the area burned, the area or whether itwas a wild fire ora managed burn. However, the area canbe calculated inthe map tool itself ifyou lay out your own polygon (see Figure 4). Itis clear, however, that both of these estimates are extremely approximate and that they may contain many errors. A particularly gross example concerns an area 40km northeast of Torneträsk where, according to EFFIS, a447 ha fire is said to have occurred on19 July 202112 12. The area isa mountain range where no fire impact canbe seen in satellite images. The source appears to have been a swarm of incorrect thermal recordings via VIIRS along the mountain slope, which was then built into a447 ha polygon based onthe contrast with the surrounding terrain, seen in Sentinel scenes. This maybe an extreme example, butit shows that automatic area interpretations of fire areas need tobe verified manually. A simple check could have eliminated this 'fire', since the area assumed to have burned looked the same in Sentinel scenes from the previous year. The work onthe registration has been carried out gradually during the season as time permits and was described byan informant as detective work. The information linked to each fire object inthe Swedish Forest Agency’s registration isas follows: Fire ID, a polygon, area, date ofthe fire/burning10 9and a note on whether itis a wildfire ora management fire. There is also space for comments. The Swedish Forest Agency estimates that the total working time for work onthe registrations has been around 15 days per year1110. 11 ). TheEU's primary goal with fire monitoring isto support firefighting efforts andto quantify the area of burned land from a damage perspective. Oneof the products is 'burnt area', i.e. an area calculation of individual fire areas, based either onthe summed VIIRS pixels oran 'assisted' plot based on Sentinel. Itis unclear how much manual work this involves for EFFIS. The subscription tothe SOS information cost 30,000 kronor for three months (July–September 8). The work has not yet been finalised. fires have an area8 77 below 0.5ha (Sjöström and Granström 2020). However, itis unlikely that there isany significant risk of false positive fire registrations, at least not when SOS alarms have been linked to changes in Sentinel scenes. The aim has been to achieve faster fire detection, by finding fires before they are observed by firefighting aircraft orthe public, and thereby being able to alert the rescue services earlier. The ambition isto register ongoing fires using signals from the two satellite types VIIRS and MODIS, andto map burned areas viaa development project to download VIIRS/MODIS data themselves when the satellites pass, and directly do their own processing. TheEU has built its own satellite-based monitoring system for vegetation fires, EFFIS (European Forest Fire Information System), with approximately the same structure asthe US's FIRMS. During 2020-2022, SMHI and MSB have operated 2.4 Satellite monitoring of fires within theEU
14 Information from Andreas Garpebring, Västerbotten County Administrative Board. Although the GIS register itself does not contain which enables reading cartographic and other information from the database (stock register) inthe field onthe phone (for example ArcGis Online) as well as directly transferring information from the phone (for example GPS loops) tothe stock register (i.e. tothe central server), orto another recipient. Small fires donot usually result inthe stands being redrawn, buta separate 'action area' canbe added that follows the boundaries ofthe burned land instead ofthe stand boundary. Various potential attributes canbe added tothe action area such as date, fire risk index, etc. At least the larger companies have GIS systems When a wildfire ofa sufficiently large area has occurred, the stand mapis of course redrawn and new units are created, where some parts ofthe fire area maybe set aside as voluntary reserves while others are felled and then managed as normal stands. In some companies' systems, there isnow room for exact dates, but the resolution has often been months or even years. 2.6 Forestry companies and other large landowners etc., but since the exact date of implementation is usually missing, itis also not possible toadd information about weather conditions, drying out, etc., retroactively. A couple of county administrative boards have, on their own initiative, collected information about planned burning and forest fires inthe county. The most extensive database isfor Västerbotten and dates back to 199014 14. The ambition has been and still isto include all fires over 1ha that have occurred within the county. The county administrative board'sown burnings areof course included there, and every autumn a question is sent tothe forestry companies and other larger landowners to obtain information about burnings and wildfires on their land. The Swedish Forest Agency is also asked, since planned burning on private land is often done with some financial support, which is administered bythe Swedish Forest Agency. Larger landowners always have GIS-based registers of their land holdings. The geographical units are 'stands', i.e. geographically delimited areas with relatively uniform status in terms of soil, tree species composition, age and previous treatment. Various management interventions such as felling, soil preparation, etc. are entered inthe log for each stand with information about when the action was carried out. The same applies to burning, which is therefore registered for the stand units affected. Itis of course possible tosee what type of stand was burned and any felling prior tothe intervention. national parks. Different county administrative boards follow partly different routines. Unfortunately, itis not currently possible to easily obtain basic information (area, polygon, date, fire risk index) for either completed burns or wildfires within formally protected natural areas inthe country. The respective county administrative board naturally hasa lotof detailed information about the burns that have been carried out, but this isnot necessarily incorporated into any GIS system. In connection with burns, the county administrative board staff usually collect alot of relevant information (weather and fire risk data before and during the burn, the progression ofthe burn during the day ofthe burn, the impact onthe stands and the soil). Often a shorter report is compiled and archived locally atthe respective county administrative board. Today, companies and larger landowners are not required to report information about management fires tothe authorities. Only afew county administrative boards (Västerbotten) request information about management fires from forest companies. The easiest wayis to just convey the polygon as defined inthe stand register, butof course it happens that only parts ofthe stand that were intended to burn were actually affected bythe fire, as well as that the fire at some point went beyond the intended boundary. Inthe event of major deviations, itcan be assumed that anew boundary is drawn, but often the stand boundary must apply asthe fire boundary. Asa rule, after completing the extinguishing operation, an employee walks along the fire boundary with aGPS inthe field to obtain an exact demarcation ofthe burn, and this information can then be forwarded with a simple push ofa button via email or text message. Ifyou need more qualified information about the burns that have been carried out, itis easy for the person responsible for forest management to create a polygon for the burned area inGIS immediately after the burn has been carried out, and send the polygon for the burned area to another party. Itis then also possible toadd an exact fire date andto indicate the purpose ofthe burn (clearing burning, nature conservation burning). When a wildfire occurs on company land, itis
Figure 5. Example of variation in fire behavior and fire effects within the same fire area. Ifyou have a polygon showing the outer limits ofthe fire, all interpretations suggested inthe image canbe made more or less automatically via satellite scenes or aerial photos taken after the fire and basic cartographic information from various sources (soil type, tree species distribution, stand age, soil moisture map, fuel map, etc.). Small patches, i.e. remaining unburned patches, canbe included inthe total fire area for simplicity. The image is from the 1800 ha fire field in Bodträskfors in 2006. Photo: Jon Kanon.
hasa polygon showing the outer limits ofthe fire, all interpretations suggested inthe image canbe made more or less sources (soil type, tree species distribution, stand age, soil moisture map, fuel map, etc.). Small mists, i.e. automatically via satellite scenes or aerial images taken after the fire as well as basic cartographic information from various Figure 5. Example of variation in fire behavior and fire effects within the same fire area. Ifone remaining unburned patches, can for simplicity's sake be included inthe total fire area. The picture is from the 1800 ha fire field in Bodträskfors in 2006. Photo: Jon Kärneskog. Table 2. Summary of stakeholders and their needs fora fire database Table 2. Summary of stakeholders and their needs fora fire database Risk assessment, nature conservation planning Landowner Income statement Forest certification USEOF FIRE DATA Goal tracking, analysis, planning Nature conservation (state and private) Research Risk assessment, resource planning, post-analysis, international information exchange Risk analyses, biodiversity research, climate- related research ACTOR Rescue services, MSB, county administrative boards (Swedish Environmental Protection Agency, SLU) Calculation of carbon flows related to burned land National climate reporting Damage analysis, consulting The Finnish Forestry Board Risk analysis Insurance company In order tobe able to perform deeper analyses, itis also necessary to retain theID from the operation database, which makes it possible to link other more rescue service-specific information from the operation that is stored there, such as resource use, operation times, etc. which fires should be included ina presumptive fire database. From a prevention point of view and for risk assessment, even small fires are important. The current limit of0.5ha used bythe Swedish Forest Agency seems unnecessarily high. It means that 88% ofall forest fires are screened out (Sjöström and Granström 2020). Ideally, all interventions would be included where itis truly a 'spontaneous' ignition in natural vegetation. Ifa size criterion is still tobe set, 100m2 maybe a more reasonable limit than 5000 m2 (1/2ha). 100m2 generally means that there has been at least some spread with blazing fire and that itis not just a fire buta 'proven' potential for spread. tobe Currently, itis the Swedish Forest Agency's auditor 3.1 Rescue services, MSB and county administrative boards Rescue services, MSBas well asthe county administrative boards' emergency managers need tobe able to easily see the geographical distribution of wildfires using GIS. These must then have a correct starting point andbe placed correctly inthe terrain, and that the cause, weather and fire risk index are linked to each fire. This makes it possible to both identify and visualize risks in time and space. and how a fire database canbe used. Several different organizations and agencies need to manage information about forest and land fires. Table 2 briefly lists some of these. The following text provides a more detailed description ofthe need for information? which draws the polygon for fires, which makes it unrealistic tomap really small fires, as they are difficult to verify in satellite scenes and From the fire department's perspective, it'snot possible. toset a specific lower area limit for3. Whyis a national fire database needed, and who is responsible forit? asking for information? 1915 BrandGIS – Management support and geographic situational awareness inthe event of forest and land fires. The project isled by Henrik Lundqvist atthe County Administrative Board in Kronoberg. A potential useof GIS for the rescue service isthe so- called AAR (after action review), that is, reviewing an operation to find shortcomings and success factors. This is rarely done today and one reason is probably that there isno verified and easily accessible geographical information for fires that have occurred. Such reviews are important for really large fires, which by definition are less successful operations (otherwise they would not have become so large). But there is reason to review even successful operations, for example multiple ignitions under high fire risk that were nevertheless able tobe kept in place. tion management during an ongoing forest fire15 1 . Asthe project isnow outlined, it will probably be used primarily in connection with large operations that last fora longer period of time. Hopefully, the systems that are created will make it easier for the operation leader to link basic GIS information (outer boundary, starting point) tothe incident report, even after smaller, routine extinguishing operations. The vast majority of 'grass fires' occur on former agricultural land and are of little conservation benefit, but fires in heathlands, mountain terrain and bogs areof interest. For example, at some shooting ranges, burning is carried out annually of largely treeless areas, which in some cases cover hundreds of hectares (Abenius and Larsson 2005; Figure 6). The aim isto reduce the fuel and thereby reduce the risk of problem fires in connection with shooting. These fires are currently completely outside all statistics, except possibly EFFIS satellite monitoring, if they are detected atall. However, the fact that they are intentional burns isnot visible there. Of course, there is then the possibility of going much deeper into a statistical analysis of what type of soil or what fuel types are burning, via data such asMSB's fuel mapor SLU's tree species map. The requirements for all such analyses are that there is correct positioning ofthe ignition point, that the final fire area is known and that there is information about the weather and fire risk indices. Inthe future, itis also likely that we will have systems for running spatially explicit fire spread models within GIS, which is already being done today in Canada and the USAin connection with major operations (Burman etal. 2016). Such systems mayin the future be used by rescue service personnel in Sweden as well, not least to train their understanding of fire behavior onthe computer, andto play alternative sequences of events for known major operations (Granström etal. 2023). Incidentally, itis not only forest fires that areof interest tothe rescue service, but also those that have affected mainly non-tree-bearing land. Provided that the rescue service canbe persuaded tolay aGPS loop around the burned area and forward this with the incident report, the problems with estimating area inthe field would disappear, as would the difficulty in distinguishing the four different 'soil types' (see Figure 1and Fact Box1). This can instead be done automatically ifthe polygon is overlaid on relevant map layers that contain soil types. moreover, so numerous. Ifone can eventually get polygons drawn bythe emergency services inthe field and incorporated into the incident report, then there isno longer any reason toset a lower size limit. Atthe national level, there is also a need for reporting tothe EU, for example onthe conservation status of fire- dependent organisms and specific habitat types, and both the Swedish Environmental Protection Agency and the SLU Species Data Bank have their own interests in following developments over time. Once you have correct polygons for burned areas, itis then relatively easy to follow their further status, for example how much is excluded from forestry inthe long term. County administrative boards as well asthe Swedish Environmental Protection Agency have an obvious need to report and illustrate the burnings carried out within formally protected areas, but also tobe able tosee the wider picture of burnings carried outby other actors as well as wildfires. For certain organisms, the spatial distribution of fires inthe landscape is important and there itis important, not least for planning burnings, tobe able tosee the spatiotemporal pattern of wildfires and completed burnings. Itis not only forests that areof interest in this context. MSBis currently funding a three-year development project (2022-2024) to strengthen information 3.2 Nature conservation
The rules are outlined inthe certification criteria. For example, one hectare of burned standing forest is “worth” the same as three hectares of burned clearing. 16 There areno regulations requiring landowners to report detailed reports of completed burns tothe FSC, only summarized information showing whether ornot the goals have been achieved. This also includes areas that have burned in wildfires. plan and evaluate their own efforts in connection with wildfires. Even though the rescue services are responsible for the main firefighting, landowners should contribute according to their ability. Not least, itis routine for landowners, especially companies and other larger owners, to carry out post-extinguishment and monitoring ofthe fire area after the fire has been contained. Even smaller landowners should be interested in cartographically reviewing fires that have occurred in their immediate area, in order tobe able to assess the risk picture and plan their own fire preparedness. 3.5 Insurance companies The forest insurance market is dominated bya small number of companies and they naturally make premium calculations based on their own claims data. They will presumably also benefit from a general database of fire occurrences, especially ifit provides verified area data and information on fire causes. A national fire database also provides a much higher resolution and more accurate picture ofthe geographical variation of forest fire risk within the country than the data that claims payments can ever provide. Both the FSC and the PFSC have certification criteria for larger landowners to burn a certain area of forest land, expressed asa percentage ofthe harvested area, spread over a five-year period. There are also 'counting rules'162in cases where land with a large proportion of remaining standing forest is burned, and land permanently set aside for nature conservation, so-called voluntary set- aside. Any review will then be carried outby independent auditors. A fire database would of course facilitate all communication between landowners, certifiers and auditors. 3.3 Forest certification Figure 6. An area atthe Mästocka and Tönnersjömålet shooting range in Halland that is burned every spring, and which asa result is home toa unique fauna and flora, including the hairbrush (Abenius and Larsson 2005). Photo: Krister Larsson. For their conservation planning, the large forest owners actually have the same need asthe state conservation agency tobe able tosee the total spatiotemporal pattern of burned land, i.e. not just what is happening on their own land. Added to this isthe need to identify fire risks, as well asto plan Insurance companies also have an interest in monitoring how the forest fire situation changes over time and how it links to climate, weather-based risk and fire causes. 3.4 Landowners
In Sweden, the Canadian 'FWI' system is used, which generates an index for calculated relative fire intensity (FWI) and various sub-indices (FFMC, DMC and DC) for moisture content in different fuel layers. 17 Today, only a general estimate ofthe carbon flow caused by fire is made, which is based onthe area data inMSB's incident reports, inquiries to large-scale forestry about the total area of management burns, and standard assumptions about the impact of fire onthe carbon stock. 3.8 Research A coherent fire database with wildfires and managed burns will facilitate various research initiatives on, for example, fire risk, fire suppression, biodiversity and forest management. In most cases, questions are naturally asked that require further data collection, but selection of sampling areas can often be made based on basic information such as geographical position, date, area, fire risk index, etc. What information needs tobe entered into a database and how can this be done? Table 3 lists a number of basic information that should be added to each wildfire and management fire. Several different ways of accessing the information are conceivable, but the table gives oneor a couple of alternatives. Figure 7 shows a possible information flow. Below are some complications for information mainly about wildfires. In addition tothe obvious need to monitor the damage situation inthe long term, the Swedish Forest Agency also potentially has other benefits from a fire database. For example, when advising landowners after wildfires have occurred (advice on reforestation, nature conservation provisions, etc.). The Swedish Forest Agency also hasan interest in handling grants for nature conservation measures in forestry, often as part of various major EU programs. Here, private landowners have been able to receive financial support for implementing nature conservation burning. The goal monitoring and review of these measures isof course facilitated if there isan easily accessible andup-to-date fire database. The Swedish Forest Agency also has extensive national responsibility for the production of statistics concerning forests, which are reported online inthe 'Swedish Forest Agency's statistics database'. Under the heading 'Measures in forestry, large-scale forestry, recreational and nature conservation burning', data is given per year (since 1997) onthe area of land burned. The data is submitted bythe respective forest companies asa lump sum for 'Comfort' and 'Nature conservation burning' respectively. Since the largest instantaneous carbon flows in connection with fire are determined by soil type and degree of drying, itis not sufficient to simply sumup the area of burned land; polygons are needed for each fire area as well as coupled fire risk indices17 3 , where for example oneof them (DMC, duff moisture code) is well correlated with the moisture content inthe humus layer and thus tothe degree of humus consumption inthe fire. 3.6 Swedish Forestry Agency land burned by wildfires has been reported tothe Swedish Forest Agency as managed fires. Itis proven that this occurred in 2014, but has probably occurred in some other years as well. This risks giving rise to double reporting of burned land in climate reporting tothe EUand theUN, since this is based ona summation ofthe MSB's area for wildfires and the Swedish Forest Agency's data on managed fires. Ascan be seen in section '2.3The Swedish Forest Agency's fire mapping', the Swedish Forest Agency hasin recent years taken ona national responsibility for mapping both wildfires and management fires and there isa stated ambition to continue, not least inthe perspective of climate change and its impact onthe forest damage situation inthe country. An uncertainty inthe statistics is that certain areas 3.7 National statistical production for climate reporting The responsible authority for climate reporting tothe EUand theUN within the “Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry” (LULUCF) sector isthe Swedish Environmental Protection Agency, but the calculations are made bySLU. For carbon budgeting, among other things, data on burned land is required nationally and internationally.
18How then should fire weather and fire risk index ensuring that the fire date and position are known. This weather and index data is important for various analyses, but there is hardly any rush to obtain it. For example, it could be done atone time atthe endof the fire season. The easiest wayto get these basics inFor each registered wildfire, a fire date is needed. The vast majority of fires are extinguished onthe same day they are reported, and should of course be linked inthe fire database with the weather and fire risk indices that prevailed that day. However, itis not uncommon for the operation tobe formally terminated only the following day, even if there has been no active spread after day one. In cases where the fire has actually spread over more than one day, itis of course necessary, fora qualified analysis, to have data on weather and index values for those days as well. However, it would complicate the database somewhat to include all that information. A compromise isto include the time ofthe alarm and the time for the rescue service to finish. Furthermore, in reality, there is almost never any high- resolution interpretation of when during the operation the most fire spread occurred, which blocks a deeper analysis. For the sake of simplicity, the daily value can therefore suffice asan indication of weather and drying conditions during each fire. In reality, itis even more complicated because the weather and thus the moisture content ofthe fuel varies within aday. The daily index is always calculated by SMHI at1 pm solar time and reflects the situation during what is normally the worst fire period during the day. However, since 2021, the fire risk index and weather are also calculated per hour. Potentially, the weather and index for the entire fire period could be linked hour by hour tothe respective fire, but this would make the database more complicated. 4.1 Wildfires Information about wildfires isvia incident reporting toMSB and not from SOS alarms. Itmay take longer to receive the material, but you can get more information and you can avoid the cost of subscribing toSOS alarm. Two essential pieces of information that are currently missing from the incident report but should eventually be added are the (presumed) starting point ofthe fire and the final extent ofthe room (polygon/shapefile). Inthe future, including this inthe incident report requires that the MSB's regulations be reformulated, and that someone inthe response team takes a final walk around the fire boundary with GPS, places a mark atthe presumed starting point and links the information further. As described under the heading 'Rescue service and MSB', this canbe handled with a phone app, after a simple change tothe software currently used. Inthe meantime, the burned area needs tobe drawn in manually, asit is today. canbe extracted and linked to individual fires? SMHI continuously calculates this data ona grid size of2.8km and the data is saved. Currently, the data is kept available to external users for one year and can be accessed via MSB's fire risk page. Manually extracting data for such a large number of fires as this isthe case is unthinkable, but according to SMHI18 4an automatic routine can easily be written that retrieves fire weather and risk indices for individual fires, provided that Asfor the starting point, experienced people can often sniff itout with relative certainty, and then it also becomes easier to state a probable cause ofthe fire inthe incident report. Today, 'Cause unknown' is stated. Furthermore, information onthe presumed cause ofthe fire is needed. Here, the information from the response database (Fact Box1) should be simplified and the cause ofthe fire should simply be recorded divided into afew but meaningful categories (for example, 'Lightning ignition', 'Machine operation', 'Camp fire', 'Smoking', 'Other known cause', 'Cause unknown'). What the specific causes should be should be further discussed among users. There maybe confidential information about certain causes of ignition, for example deliberately set fires (arson) or accidents, which should therefore be placed under 'Other known cause'. 4A possible future structure Johan Böhlin, SMHI, personal communication.
4.2Management fires Here itis reasonable to make a rough division into, for example, cutting class. The date for implementation anda polygon for the burned area should be available from the landowner, which in most cases isthe county administrative board orone ofthe large forestry companies, provided that a clear and simple routine for the transfer of information has been agreed upon. Most ofthe other information The incident report* - - from 'polygon' The Finnish Forestry Board The database administrator Report number Resource usage (man-hours) Event report total area ofthe database manager) Starting point (Sweref 99) (Incident report*) Brand-ID Calculated bythe database administrator SMHI via the database manager Automatic reinterpretation from Date of fire - The incident report* The Finnish Forestry Board Calculated bythe database administrator The Finnish Forestry Board Land managers (companies, reserve managers) The incident report Polygon surface coverage (shapefile) Calculated bythe database administrator Weather and fire risk index The database administrator - The incident report (for all fires with 'polygon' is calculated Alarm time, arrival time, end Rtj Landowner category The incident report The incident report Land managers (companies, reserve managers), Area from 'polygon' from 'polygon' - SMHI via the database manager Brandors The incident report (Forre- ignitions reported as separate incidents, itis important to link these together) Land manager, Swedish Forestry Agency, Affected land type (forest19, clearing, rock obstacle, bog, open land) 19 POSSIBLE SOURCE, WILD POSSIBLE SOURCE, BURNERS Table 3. Basic information that there is reason to collect, or create for wildfires and management fires, and link toa fire database and keep visible inan easily accessible map service, such asthe Swedish Forest Agency's. INFORMATION CARE BURNERS for over 30% ofall forest fires. Although every rescue operation already receives a position information inthe incident report today, this is often taken from the vehicles onthe nearest road (orvia the fire aircraft), andis often located a good distance from the actual starting point. Table 3. Basic information that there is reason to collect, or create for wildfires and management fires, respectively. An asterisk by 'Incident report*' means that the information in question isnot included asa requirement inthe MSB'sand linked toa fire database and kept visible inan easily accessible map service, like the Swedish Forest Agency's. An asterisk by regulation for incident reporting, but should be added inthe future to strengthen this. The date of implementation anda polygon for the burned area should be available from the landowner, which in most cases isthe county administrative board orone ofthe large forestry companies, provided that a clear and simple routine for the transfer of information has been agreed upon. Most ofthe other information canbe linked more or less automatically, 4.2 Maintenance fires 'The incident report*' means that the information in question isnot included asa requirement inthe MSB's incident reporting regulation, but should be able tobe added inthe future to strengthen it.
Regardless ofwho will manage the fire database inthe future, it would be desirable tobe able to select 'Year', 'Size category', 'Cause', 'Owner category', with a simple push ofa button already inthe map service. As described under the heading '2.3The Forestry Board's fire mapping', the Forestry Board hasin its mapping service figures drawn for all fires that they has mapped. However, itis not possible today tosee whether itis a wildfire ornot, noris there a date (not even a year) for the fire/burning. such as fire weather and fire risk index (see above under wildfires). It would possibly beof value inthe case of company land to provide information on whether the burned area is more or less permanently set aside for nature conservation purposes. 4.3 General requests for map interface 'Wild' versus 'Management fires'. In addition, itis desirable that the material canbe exported ina simple way. Figure 7. Template sketch for possible information flow toa fire database.
2. The Swedish Forest Agency has good conditions tobe If instead one gains access tothe event reports for forest and land fires from MSB, the Swedish Forest Agency's work with mapping will be significantly easier. Onthe one hand, there isan area data and other information that makes it possible to filter out false alarms etc. and makes it much easier to search for the fire area in satellite scenes. In addition, the event report contains alot of important information that should be added tothe database (ID number, cause, extent ofthe operation in time, possibly resource use). Since the event reporting system is automatic, it should be possible to filter atthe source (MSB) and send an edited version ofthe reports tothe Swedish Forest Agency as soon as they reach MSB. The rules on cooperation between authorities mean that this data should be delivered free of charge, but one must of course carefully evaluate which information should and can be transferred, including taking into account confidentiality rules. Getting basic information from the incident reports instead of from SOS probably results ina certain delay compared to getting SOS data once a week, which has been the case sofar inthe work ofthe Swedish Forest Agency. Ifthe curve in Figure 2is also representative for forest and land fires during the summer, itmay still be acceptable. The median time from intervention to reporting was around four days. both the performer and data host ofa fire database. They have a general responsibility for monitoring forest damage but also for nature conservation work in forests. They also have experienced staff thanks tothe mapping they have done in recent years. 1. The workshop held in October 2021 showed that there is interest from all participating organizations fora unified fire field database covering both wildfires and maintenance fires. However, itis clear that some steps need tobe taken to increase the accuracy of current data collection and make management more rational. 5. Today, the Swedish Forest Agency subscribes to relatively 'dumb' basic information (only providing time, position, fire type) from SOS regarding wildfires. exact coordinates tothe client. In order for the information (date, starting point, polygon) to actually reach the fire database, there must be clear instructions on what is being requested, what the purpose isand which account isthe recipient. This needs tobe anchored with responsible managers within the companies, and other large landowners. 4.4 Conclusions If their commitment isto be extended to 'all' fires in forests and land, i.e. without setting any lower area limit andto also include fires in vegetation other than forests, an agreement between the various parties is required and the financing is sorted out. 3. It would bea great improvement if rescue the service could collect spatial data for wildfires directly inthe field (starting point and fire boundary) in connection with the termination ofthe operation and that this data could be automatically incorporated into the incident report. However, this would require both a change inthe MSB's regulations anda minor restructuring ofthe mobile apps used bythe rescue services inthe field (currently DAEDALOS RESPONS andCS Atom). 6. Management fires can only be captured via direct information from the performers or clients (county administrative boards, forestry companies, dioceses, the Swedish Fortification Agency, etc.). Here, care should be taken to establish communication directly with the district managers atthe companies (either the nature conservation specialist orthe person responsible for forest management). Today, the districts areso large that relatively few people are involved. The performers of burning 4. While waiting fora system where the fire service collects and delivers spatial fire data, channels should be developed for the large landowners to send polygons tothe Swedish Forest Agency immediately after wildfires have ended. Itcan be assumed that their personnel almost always GPS-set the fire boundary for their own use ifit concerns a significant area of burned land, and not infrequently they can also find a probable starting point if they are asked todo so. However, there isno reason toset a lower size limit. Itis true that many small fires will notbe coordinated byany official inthe field. Onthe other hand, post-extinguishment and monitoring are almost always carried out even on small fire spots, often by independent contractors, and these patrols can easily forward
enables communication with, for example, a database. API – application programming interface, the system that 20As with wildfires, there is reason to forward the information as soon as possible, which requires a simple and clear routine. There isof course reason for the fire database administrator to check that the given polygon corresponds more or less to what canbe read in Sentinel scenes. Should there be clear deviations, for example that a larger part ofthe area has remained unburned, the given fire boundary should of course be corrected. 8. The fire database should be made widely available viaa map service. The closest isthe Swedish Forest Agency'smap service, not least because alot of stand information and other geographical information canbe viewed there atthe same time. But the fire information must be selectable primarily by year, fire area, and fire type. The exact design should be discussed with potential users from both the rescue and nature conservation sectors. 7. Weather and fire risk index for the fire day must be linked to each wildfire and management fire, which significantly improves the potential useof the database (Sjöström and Granström 2023). Here itis possible to create a simple Excel spreadsheet that retrieves data via SMHI's API205 are either our own staff or hired contractors, but the management manager atthe administration is always informed when a burn is carried out and has access tothe fire date anda polygon for the burn after ithas been carried out. based on dates and coordinates. This can either be done continuously orin larger batches. Perhaps the most rational isto doit ata single time, after the end ofthe fire season in September. 9. The next step in realizing a national fire database should bea meeting between competent managers atthe Swedish Forest Agency, MSB, SMHI, the Swedish Environmental Protection Agency, and the larger forest companies to agree to cooperate on this issue and give thego-ahead for each organization to participate. The authority that takes primary responsibility for the database can then give detailed suggestions onhow to structure the information collection.
Granström, A., J. Sjöström andL. Vylund. 2023. Perception of wildfire behavior potential among Swedish incident commanders, and their fire suppression tactics revealed through tabletop exercises. International Journal of Wildand Fire doi:10.1071/WF22085. Sjöström, J., andA. Granström. 2020. Forest fires and grass fires in Sweden. Trends and patterns during Burman, J., A. Granström, I. Bohlin, P.-Å. Gradmark, andC. Lejon. 2016. Dispersion models for Engström, A. 2000. Modern forest fires. Degree project, Forest ecology and management, SLU. fire in vegetation. Test of models suitable for Swedish conditions. MSB. Abenius, J. andK. Larsson 2005. Thorns and other insects in four heath areas in Halland. Report, Halland County Administrative Board. later decades. MSB, Swedish Civil Contingencies Agency. Sjöström, J., andA. Granström. 2023. Human activity and demographics drive the fire regime ina highly developed European region. Fire Safety Journal 136 (103437). 5. References
SLUis environmentally certified according toISO 14001 (cid:127) Telephone: 018-6710 00 (cid:127) Corporate ID: 202100-2817 SLU, the Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, has operations throughout Sweden. The main locations are Alnarp, Uppsala and Umeå.
