Interagency Standards for Fire and Fire Aviation Operations Department ofthe Interior Bureau of Land Management National Park Service U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Bureau of Indian Affairs Department of Agriculture Forest Service 2025 January 2025 Errata
Chapter 1 Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy and Doctrine Overview Chapter 2BLM Program Organization and Responsibilities Chapter 3NPS Program Organization and Responsibilities Chapter 4FWS Program Organization and Responsibilities Chapter 5 USFS Program Organization and Responsibilities Chapter 6BIA Program Organization and Responsibilities Chapter 7 Safety and Risk Management Chapter 8 Interagency Coordination and Cooperation Chapter 9 Fire Management Planning Chapter 10 Preparedness Chapter 11 Incident Management and Response Chapter 12 Suppression Chemicals and Delivery Systems Chapter 13 Firefighter Training and Qualifications Chapter 14 Firefighting Equipment Chapter 15 Communications Chapter 16 Aviation Operations and Resources Chapter 17 Fuels Management Chapter 18 Reviews and Investigations Chapter 19 Dispatch and Coordination System
Interagency Standards for Fire and Fire Aviation Operations January 2025 Produced bythe Interagency Standards for Fire and Fire Aviation Operations Group, National Interagency Fire Center, Boise, ID. This document is posted at https://www.nifc.gov/standards/guides/red-book. Starting in January 2024, this book is only available electronically. The Great Basin Cache will no longer stock this book. Some forms inPDF fillable or MSWord format are available onthe National Interagency Fire Center (NIFC) website (https://www.nifc.gov/standards/guides/red-book).
NATIONAL INTERAGENCY FIRE CENTER 3833 S. Development Avenue Boise, Idaho 83705-5354 January 15, 2025 To: Agency Personnel From: Fire and Aviation Directors Bureau of Land Management U.S. Forest Service U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Park Service Bureau of Indian Affairs Subject: Interagency Standards for Fire and Fire Aviation Operations The Fire and Aviation Directors ofthe Bureau of Land Management, U.S. Forest Service, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, National Park Service, and Bureau of Indian Affairs have directed the Interagency Standards for Fire and Fire Aviation Operations Group (ISOG) to annually revise, publish, and distribute the Federal Interagency Standards for Fire and Fire Aviation Operations, and issue errata to this document. The Interagency Standards for Fire and Fire Aviation Operations, states, references, or supplements policy and provides program direction for Bureau of Land Management, U.S. Forest Service, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, National Park Service, and Bureau of Indian Affairs fire and fire aviation program management. Employees engaged in fire suppression and fire management activities will comply with interagency and agency-specific health, safety, and fire management policy documents. For the Bureau of Land Management, this document provides policy and guidance as referenced inBLM Manual Section (MS) 9200 Fire Program Management. For the USDA Forest Service, this document provides guidance for implementing safe and effective fire and aviation management operations based on policy in Forest Service Manual 5100 and 5700. For the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, this document provides direction for implementation of621 FW1. For the National Park Service, this document supplements Reference Manual 18. For the Bureau of Indian Affairs, this document provides policy on field-level fire operations, in addition to policy referenced inthe Indian Affairs Manual (IAM) Section 90. This document addresses specific action items that are contained inthe Guidance for Implementation of Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy (February 13, 2009). The contents of this book are not tobe modified. Supplemental agency-specific direction ofa more restrictive nature maybe issued separately.
Suggestions for modification ofthe publication should be sent to your agency representatives listed on this page. Grant Beebe Assistant Director, Fire & Aviation, Bureau of Land Management Adam Mendoca Deputy Director, Fire & Aviation Management, U.S. Forest Service Ed Christopher Chief, Fire Management Branch, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Jason Fallon Chief, Wildland Fire, National Park Service Aaron Baldwin Division Chief of Wildland Fire Management, Bureau of Indian Affairs Interagency Standards for Fire and Fire Aviation Operations Group agency respresentatives: Marlene Eno-Hendren, BLM Mike Spilde, BLM Steven Miller, FS Karen Kufta, FS Eric Fransted, FWS Andrew Bailey, FWS Russ Babiak, NPS Michael Guarino, NPS Garth Fisher, BIA Adrian Grayshield, BIA

Chapter 1 Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy and Doctrine Overview Scope The Interagency Standards for Fire and Fire Aviation Operations states, references, or supplements policy for Bureau of Land Management (BLM), U.S. Forest Service (USFS), U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS), National Park Service (NPS), and Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) fire and fire aviation program management. Original source policy is stated or referenced throughout this handbook. This handbook attempts to reference policy, rather than paraphrase policy to limit duplication. The Interagency Standards for Fire and Fire Aviation Operations is intended to comply with and support the Review and Update ofthe 1995 Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy (January 2001) and the Guidance for Implementation of Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy (February 13, 2009) and other existing Federal policy. Website: https://www.doi.gov/wildlandfire/policy Purpose The Interagency Standards for Fire and Fire Aviation Operations provides fire and fire aviation program management direction for BLM, USFS, FWS, NPS, and BIA managers. Employees engaged in fire management activities will continue to comply with all agency policies. Other references, such asthe National Wildfire Coordinating Group Incident Response Pocket Guide provide operational guidance. Review and Update ofthe 1995 Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy (January 2001) The Review and Update ofthe Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy (pp. 21-22) established the following guiding principles as fundamental tothe successful implementation ofthe 2001 Federal Fire Policy. 1. Firefighter and public safety isthe first priority in every fire management activity. 2. The role of wildland fire asan essential ecological process and natural change agent will be incorporated into the planning process. Federal agency land and resource management plans set the objectives for the use and desired future condition ofthe various public lands. 3. Fire management plans (FMP), programs, and activities support land and resource management plans (LRMP) and their implementation. 4. Sound risk management isa foundation for all fire management activities. Risks and uncertainties relating to fire management activities must be understood, analyzed, communicated, and managed as they relate tothe cost of either doing ornot doing an activity. Net gains tothe public benefit will bean important component of decisions. 5. Fire management programs and activities are economically viable, based upon values tobe protected, costs, and land and resource management objectives. Federal agency administrators are adjusting andre- organizing programs to reduce costs and increase efficiencies. As part of this process, investments in fire management activities must be evaluated against other agency programs in order to effectively accomplish the overall mission, set short- and long-term priorities, and clarify management accountability. 6. FMPs and activities are based upon the best available science. Knowledge and experience are developed among all wildland fire management agencies. An active fire research program combined with interagency collaboration provides the means to make these tools available toall fire managers. 7. FMPs and activities incorporate public health and environmental quality considerations. 8. Federal, State, Tribal, local, interagency, and international coordination and cooperation are essential. Increasing costs and smaller work forces require that public agencies pool their human resources to successfully deal with the ever-increasing and more complex fire management tasks. Full collaboration among Federal agencies and between the Federal agencies, and international, State, Tribal, and local governments, and private entities results ina mobile fire management workforce available for the full range of public needs. 9. Standardization of policies and procedures among Federal agencies isan ongoing objective. Consistency of plans and operations provides the fundamental platform upon which Federal agencies can cooperate, integrate fire activities across agency boundaries, and provide leadership for cooperation with State, Tribal, and local fire management organizations.
2001 Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy The 2001 Review and Update ofthe Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy (pp. 23-25) established the following policies: 1. Safety Firefighter and public safety isthe first priority. All FMPs and activities must reflect this commitment. 2. Fire Management and Ecosystem Sustainability The full range of fire management activities will be used to help achieve ecosystem sustainability, including interrelated ecological, economic, and social components. 3. Response to Wildland Fire Fire, asa critical natural process, will be integrated into LRMPs and activities ona landscape scale, and across agency boundaries. Response to wildland fires is based on ecological, social, and legal consequences ofthe fire. The circumstances under which a fire occurs, and the likely consequences on firefighter and public safety and welfare, natural and cultural resources, and values tobe protected dictate the appropriate management response tothe fire. 4. Useof Wildland Fire Wildland fire will be used to protect, maintain, and enhance resources and, as nearly as possible, be allowed to function inits natural ecological role. Useof fire will be based on approved FMPs and will follow specific prescriptions contained in operational plans. 5. Rehabilitation and Restoration Rehabilitation and restoration efforts will be undertaken to protect and sustain ecosystems, public health, and safety, andto help communities protect infrastructure. 6. Protection Priorities The protection of human life isthe single, overriding priority. Setting priorities among protecting human communities and community infrastructure, other property and improvements, and natural and cultural resources will be based onthe values tobe protected, human health and safety, and the costs of protection. Once people have been committed toan incident, these human resources become the highest value tobe protected. 7. Wildland Urban Interface The operational roles ofthe Federal agencies as partners inthe wildland urban interface (WUI) are wildland firefighting, hazardous fuels reduction, cooperative prevention and education, and technical assistance. Structural fire suppression isthe responsibility of Tribal, State, or local governments. Federal agencies may assist with exterior structural fire protection activities under formal fire protection agreements that specify the mutual responsibilities ofthe partners, including funding. (Some Federal agencies have full structural protection authority for their facilities on lands they administer and may also enter into formal agreements to assist State and local governments with structural protection.) 8. Planning Every area with burnable vegetation must have an approved FMP. FMPs are strategic plans that define a program to manage wildland and prescribed fires based onthe area’s approved LMP. Fire management plans must provide for firefighter and public safety; include fire management strategies, tactics, and alternatives; address values tobe protected, and public health issues; andbe consistent with resource management objectives, activities ofthe area, and environmental laws and regulations. 9. Science Fire management plans and fire programs will be based ona foundation of sound science. Research will support ongoing efforts to increase our scientific knowledge of biological, physical, and sociological factors. Information needed to support fire management will be developed through an integrated interagency fire science program. Scientific results must be made available to managers ina timely manner and must be used inthe development of LMPs, FMPs, and implementation plans. 10. Preparedness Agencies will ensure their capability to provide safe, cost-effective fire management programs in support of LRMPs through appropriate planning, staffing, training, equipment, and management oversight. 11. Suppression Wildland fires are suppressed at minimum cost, considering firefighter and public safety, benefits, and values tobe protected consistent with resource objectives. 12. Prevention Agencies will work together and with their partners and other affected groups and individuals to prevent unauthorized ignition of wildland fires.
13. Standardization Agencies will use compatible planning processes, funding mechanisms, training and qualification requirements, operational procedures, values-to-be protected methodologies, and public education programs for all fire management activities. 14. Interagency Cooperation and Coordination Fire management planning, preparedness, prevention, suppression, fire use, restoration and rehabilitation, monitoring, research, and education will be conducted onan interagency basis with the involvement of cooperators and partners. 15. Communication and Education Agencies will enhance knowledge and understanding of wildland fire management policies and practices through internal and external communication and education programs. These programs will be continuously improved through the timely and effective exchange of information among all affected agencies and organizations. 16. Agency Administrator and Employee Roles Agency administrators will ensure that their employees are trained, certified, and made available to participate inthe wildland fire program locally, regionally, and nationally asthe situation demands. Employees with operational, administrative, or other skills will support the wildland fire programs, as necessary. Agency administrators are responsible and will be held accountable for making employees available. 17. Evaluation Agencies will develop and implement a systematic method of evaluation to determine effectiveness of projects through implementation ofthe 2001 Federal Fire Policy. The evaluation will assure accountability, facilitate resolution of areas of conflict, and identify resource shortages and agency priorities. Guidance for Implementation of Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy (February 13, 2009) On February 13, 2009, the Fire Executive Council (FEC) approved Guidance for Implementation of Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy. This guidance provides for consistent implementation ofthe 1995/2001 Federal Fire Policy, as directed bythe Wildland Fire Leadership Council.” (, Guidance for Implementation of Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy, February 13, 2009). The following guidelines should be used to provide consistent implementation of Federal wildland fire policy: 1. Wildland fire management agencies will use common standards for all aspects of their fire management programs to facilitate effective collaboration among cooperating agencies. 2. Agencies and bureaus will review, update, and develop agreements that clarify the jurisdictional inter- relationships and define the roles and responsibilities among local, State, Tribal, and Federal fire protection entities. 3. Responses to wildland fire will be coordinated across levels of government regardless ofthe jurisdiction atthe ignition source. 4. Fire management plans will be intergovernmental in scope and developed ona landscape scale. 5. Wildland fire isa general term describing any non-structure fire that occurs inthe wildland. Wildland fires are categorized into two distinct types: a. Wildfires – Unplanned ignitions or prescribed fires that are declared wildfires. b. Prescribed Fires – Planned ignitions. 6. A wildland fire maybe concurrently managed for one or more objectives and objectives can change asthe fire spreads across the landscape. Objectives are affected by changes in fuels, weather, topography; varying social understanding and tolerance; and involvement of other governmental jurisdictions having different missions and objectives. 7. Management response toa wildland fire on Federal land is based on objectives established inthe applicable LMP/RMP, and/orthe FMP. 8. Initial action on human-caused wildfire will beto suppress the fire atthe lowest cost with the fewest negative consequences with respect to firefighter and public safety. 9. Managers will usea decision support process to guide and document wildfire management decisions. The process will provide situational assessment, analyze hazards and risk, define implementation actions, and document decisions and rationale for those decisions. Guidance for Implementation of Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy (February 13, 2009), page 7.
Definitions Key policy definitions selected from appendix Aof the Guidance for Implementation of Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy as updated by Fire Management Board (FMB) Memorandum 19-004 issued October 11, 2019. Initial Response: The initial decisions and actions taken in reaction toa reported incident. Initial Attack: An aggressive action toput the fire outby the first resources to arrive, consistent with firefighter and public safety and values tobe protected. Prescribed Fire (see also “Wildland Fire”): A wildland fire originating from a planned ignition in accordance with applicable laws, policies, and regulations to meet specific objectives. Suppression: All the work to extinguish a fire or limit wildland fire spread. Wildfire: A wildland fire originating from an unplanned ignition, such as lightning, volcanos, unauthorized and accidental human caused fires, and prescribed fires that are declared wildfires. Wildland Fire (includes wildfires and prescribed fires): Any non-structure fire that occurs in vegetation or natural fuels. Other Definitions Extended Attack: Actions taken ona wildfire that has exceeded the initial response. Extended-attack Incident: An incident that exceeds the capability ofthe initial attack resources and/or organization to successfully manage the incident to conclusion. Fire Operations Doctrine Purpose of Fire Operations Doctrine Fire operations doctrine states the fundamental principles onthe subject of fire operations. This doctrine establishes a particular wayof thinking about fire operations and provides a philosophy for leading firefighters in fire operations, a mandate for professionalism, anda common language. Fire operations doctrine does not consist of procedures tobe applied to specific situations so much asit sets forth general guidance that requires judgment in application. The Nature of Fire Operations Fire isa complex, dynamic, and often unpredictable phenomenon. Fire operations require mobilizing a complex organization that includes management, command, support, and firefighting personnel, as well as aircraft, vehicles, machinery, and communications equipment. While the magnitude and complexity ofthe fire itself andof the human response toit will vary, the fact that fire operations are inherently dangerous will never change. A firefighter, utilizing the best available science, equipment, training, and working within the scope of agency doctrine and policy can still suffer serious injury or death. Wildland Fire Operations Risk Management The primary means by which accidents are prevented in wildland fire operations is through aggressive risk management. This safety philosophy acknowledges that while the ideal level of risk maybe zero, a hazard-free work environment isnot a reasonable or achievable goal in fire operations. Through organized, comprehensive, and systematic risk management, fire personnel will determine the acceptable level of risk that allows for safety yet still achieves fire operations objectives. Risk management is intended to minimize the number of injuries or fatalities experienced by wildland firefighters. Fire Preparedness Fire preparedness isthe state of being ready to provide an appropriate response to wildfires based on identified objectives. Preparedness isthe result of activities that are planned and implemented prior to fire ignitions. Preparedness requires identifying necessary firefighting capabilities and implementing coordinated programs to develop those capabilities. Preparedness requires a continuous process of developing and maintaining firefighting infrastructure, predicting fire activity, implementing prevention activities, identifying values tobe protected, hiring, training, equipping, prepositioning, and deploying firefighters and equipment, evaluating performance, correcting deficiencies, and improving operations. All preparedness activities should be focused on developing fire operations capabilities andon performing successful fire operations. Fire Operations Command Philosophy Itis essential that our philosophy of command support the way we conduct fire operations. First and foremost, in order to generate effective decision making in fire operations, andto cope with the unpredictable nature of fire, commander intent must be lucid and unambiguous, and lines of authority must be clearly articulated and understood.
Subordinate commanders must make decisions on their own initiative based on their understanding of their commander’s intent. A competent subordinate commander whois atthe point of decision may understand a situation more clearly than a senior commander some distance removed. In this case, the subordinate commander must have the freedom to take decisive action directed toward the accomplishment of operational objectives. However, this does not imply that unity of effort does not exist, or that actions are not coordinated. Unity of effort requires coordination and cooperation among all forces toward a commonly understood objective. Unified, coordinated action, whether between adjacent single resources onthe fireline or between the highest command level and the most subordinate firefighter, is critical to successful fire operations. Fire Leadership Leadership isthe artof influencing people in order to achieve a result. The most essential element for success inthe wildland fire service is good leadership. Good leaders provide purpose, direction, and motivation for wildland firefighters working to accomplish difficult tasks under dangerous, stressful circumstances. Leaders often face difficult problems to which there areno simple, clear-cut, by-the-book solutions. In these situations, leaders must use their knowledge, skill, experience, education, values, and judgment to make decisions andto take or direct action—in short, to provide leadership. All firefighters, regardless of position, must provide leadership. Fire Suppression The purpose of fire suppression isto protect values at risk of loss by putting the fire outin the safest, most effective, and efficient manner. Every firefighter, whether ina management, command, support, or direct suppression role, should be committed to maximizing the safe, effective, and efficient engagement of capable firefighters in suppression action. Principles of Suppression Operations Wildland fire leaders implement command decisions and maintain unity of action by using the common principles of suppression operations to improve decision making and firefighter safety. The principles of Risk Management; Standard Firefighting Orders and Watch Out Situations; Lookouts, Communication, Escape Routes, Safety Zones (LCES); and the Downhill Checklist guide our fundamental fire suppression practices, behaviors, customs, and are mutually understood at every level of command. These principles are not absolute rules and require judgment in application. Principles of Fire Suppression Action The principles of fire suppression action provide a framework for developing fire suppression strategy and for conducting fire suppression operations. Again, these are not absolute or immutable rules. These five principles provide a consistent setof considerations with which to evaluate decisions, plans, and actions in different situations. 1. Objective Objectives direct every fire suppression operation toward a clearly defined, attainable end state. 2. Speed and Focus Speed is rapidity of action. Focus isthe convergence of appropriate resources atthe desired position to initiate action. Speed and focus results in increased likelihood of successful suppression actions. 3. Positioning Positioning of fire suppression resources ranges from single resource offensive or defensive reactions to changing fire conditions, to prepositioning of multiple resources based on predicted activity and values at risk. Positioning should always be undertaken with speed and focus in mind and with sufficient time for positioning to occur before operations begin. Positioning using strategic and opportunistic movement increases the effectiveness of fire suppression resources. 4. Simplicity Simplicity provides clear, uncomplicated plans and concise orders. Simplicity contributes to successful actions, maximizing effectiveness and minimizing confusion. 5. Safety Safety is fundamental to successful suppression action. Safety not only contributes to successful actions; itis indispensable to them. Cost-Effective Fire Operations Maximizing the cost effectiveness ofany fire operation isthe responsibility ofall involved, including those that authorize, direct, or implement those operations. Cost effectiveness isthe most economical useof the suppression resources necessary to accomplish mission objectives. Accomplishing fire operations objectives safely and efficiently will notbe sacrificed for the sole purpose of “cost savings.” Care will be taken to ensure that suppression expenditures are commensurate with values tobe protected, while understanding that other factors may influence spending decisions, including the social, political, economic, and biophysical environments.
Chapter 2BLM Program Organization and Responsibilities Introduction This chapter provides policy and guidance for Bureau of Land Management (BLM) Fire and Aviation (FA) program management as referenced inBLM Manual Section (MS) 9200 Fire Program Management (https://www.blm.gov/policy/manuals). These standards are based on Department ofthe Interior (DOI) and BLM policy. They are intended to ensure safe, consistent, efficient, and effective fire and aviation operations fora fire organization to manage state and/or local unit fire workload or meet approved national program resource allocations. Bureau employees engaged in fire management activities, including fire program management, fire suppression, and fire program/incident support, will adhere tothe standards in this document. This chapter will be reviewed and updated annually. Harassment and Discrimination All fire personnel will be provided with a workplace free of harassment and unlawful discrimination. The Department is committed to providing a work environment free of discrimination and harassment based on race, color, religion, sex (including pregnancy), sexual orientation, national origin, age, disability, genetic information (including family medical history), status asa parent, marital status, or political affiliation, and free from illegal retaliation. Discrimination, inany form, hasno place inour organization and will notbe tolerated. Discrimination includes sexual ornon-sexual harassment; any discriminatory act, policy, practice, or procedure that denies equal opportunity; orany conduct that demeans the dignity of another person. All personnel have a responsibility to carry out this policy and create a work environment a reasonable person would not consider intimidating, hostile, or offensive. Managers and supervisors have a duty toact when they observe or become aware of allegations of harassing and/or discriminatory conduct. Managers and supervisors must make every effort to provide a work environment free of harassment and/or illegal discrimination and ensure subordinates are aware ofthe policy and its requirement. The manager/supervisor who receives the report of, or otherwise becomes aware of, harassing conduct must promptly contact the servicing human resources officer (HRO). Ifthe reported activity poses a security risk or there isa threat of immediate physical harm, law enforcement must be notified immediately. Sexual harassment isa form of discrimination that involves unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct ofa sexual nature. Workplace harassment ofany kind may also bea form of discrimination ifit involves unwelcome verbal or physical conduct based on race, color, national origin, religion, sex, age (over 40), disability, sexual orientation, or genetic information. Behavior that is hostile and/or intimidating creates an abusive or offensive work environment and there will be consequences to those who are found to have engaged in harassing conduct. All allegations of harassment (sexual ornon-sexual) will be taken seriously and dealt with fairly and promptly. Contacting home unit Human Resources (HR) and Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) offices when harassment ofany kind occurs while on fire assignment is critical. Reprisal against an individual who reports harassment ofany kind is illegal. Reprisal isthe wrongful threatening or taking of either unfavorable action or withholding favorable action from another solely in response for their opposing employment discrimination or participating inan EEO activity protected by employment discrimination statutes. An employee who engages in harassment or discrimination faces consequences ranging from verbal warnings and letters of reprimand, upto termination from employment, depending onthe seriousness ofthe misconduct. Managers and supervisors whodo not act when they know or suspect that harassment or discrimination is occurring also face discipline. Contractor staff maybe subject to comparable penalties from their employers. A contractor who fails to enforce this policy may have its contract terminated. Visitors to fire camps who engage in harassment maybe removed and prevented from returning. Fire leaders atall levels have the responsibility to serve as role models of appropriate behavior, and should confront any form of discrimination, harassment, or other improper behavior when itis observed or reported. Supervisors have a duty toact when they become aware of harassment ofany kind and will be held accountable for responding toand stopping harassment while on fire assignments.
All reports of alleged discrimination will be taken seriously, promptly investigated, and handled with professionalism, dignity, and fairness. Incident personnel who believe they have been subjected to discrimination, harassment, or reprisal, should be directed to their home unit EEO manager oran EEO counselor within 45 days ofthe alleged discriminatory matter. Department ofthe Interior Personnel Bulletin No. 18-01, Prevention and Elimination of Harassing Conduct, updates and amends the Department’s policy on providing a work environment free from harassment. All questions or concerns regarding harassment, sexual harassment, orany form of illegal discrimination should be directed tothe home unit EEO manager orthe Fire and Aviation Directorate (FA) EEO Manager (208-387-5454). Employee Conduct All employees, cooperators, contractors, and volunteers who participate in wildland fire operations have the duty to treat each other with respect andto maintain a work environment free of misconduct and harassment. Misconduct includes butis not limited to alcohol misuse, driving while intoxicated, the use of illegal drugs, hazing, insubordination, disregard for policies and procedures, and the destruction or theft of Government property. Examples of Misconduct • Hazing – Hazing is considered a form of harassment. Hazing is defined as “any action taken, or situation created intentionally, to produce mental or physical discomfort, embarrassment, or ridicule.” • Alcohol – The use of alcohol during any work period is strictly prohibited. The performance ofjob duties while under the influence of alcohol is prohibited. Underage personnel alcohol useis prohibited atall times. Critical Incident Stress Management (CISM) Program Standard of Care and Certification The BLM Fire and Aviation Directorate (FAD) is committed to crisis intervention practices that adhere tothe standard of care established bythe International Critical Incident Stress Foundation (ICISF), in providing stabilization of personnel and preventing further harm. A licensed mental health professional is required to assist critical incident peer support (CIPS) groups. Peer supporters are not trained nor are they qualified to operate independently; doing sois a violation ofthe established boundaries of competence and compromises the integrity ofthe program. CISM Qualifications All BLM personnel participating ina CISM response shall be qualified asa CISM team member (also CISM) oras a CISM team leader (CISL). Position qualifications are adopted from the Department ofthe Interior (DOI) Incident Positions Qualification Guide (IPQG) and are inthe Federal Wildland Fire Qualifications Supplement. Special consideration shall be given when recommending or approving either CISM or CISL. A recommendation bythe employee’s fire management officer is required. This recommendation will goto the Geographic Area Coordination Center (GACC) CISM coordinator for approval. Ifthe GACC does not have a CISM program or coordinator, recommendations must be sent tothe BLM National CISM Coordinator for approval. Approval for CISL qualifications will be made bythe BLM National CISM Coordinator after review ofa recommendation from the employee’s state fire management officer and the GACC CISM coordinator. CISM Request Processes The BLM Fire and Aviation Directorate’s (FAD) CISM Program is intended for employees who work inthe fire and aviation program with work-related needs but may assist other employees as needed and requested. Crisis intervention should be based on recognition of need, not strictly the occurrence ofan event. What is appropriate will depend onthe nature, severity, and duration ofthe event; the number, skills, and cohesiveness of those involved; and the severity of their physical and emotional symptoms. The CISM Program does not replace professional counseling and other services available to employees through the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), butit does help align those resources asan appropriate next step when applicable. • Fire Request The BLM does not maintain standing CISM teams oran on-call rotation. An agency administrator (AADM) or designee requests CISM through the GACC CISM coordinator. Ifthe GACC does not have a CISM coordinator, the GACC will notify the BLM National CISM Coordinator. A CIPS group will be assembled atthe time of request and will be composed of members who align with the backgrounds and experience of those involved inthe critical incident (e.g., hand crews, helitack crews, veterans, dispatchers). • Non-Fire Request Bureau requests for CISM support for non-fire incidents must be authorized bythe state director and routed tothe Assistant Director (FAD). The BLM National CISM Coordinator shall work directly with the unit affected
to determine the most appropriate response and ensure the appropriate response is coordinated with necessary resources. Useof the coordination system isnot required for non-fire events. Website: https://gacc.nifc.gov/cism/index.html BLM Fire Operations Website The BLM Fire Operations website (https://doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/blm-fa/fire-operations) hosts operational, informational, and policy-related documents. The website also contains information about the National Fire Equipment Program (NFEP), the National Fire Training and Workforce Development Program, and the BLM Fire Operations Group (FOG) and its subcommittees. National Wildfire Coordinating Group Relationship toBLM The National Wildland Coordinating Group (NWCG) provides national leadership to enable interoperable wildland fire operations among Federal, State, local, Tribal, and territorial partners. The NWCG establishes national interagency wildland fire operations standards, but the decision to adopt the standards is made independently bythe members and communicated through their respective directives systems. See chapter 8for NWCG members. The BLM provides a representative tothe NWCG Executive Board and representatives to various NWCG committees and subcommittees. These individuals are responsible for representing the BLM during NWCG decision-making processes and ensuring that proposed NWCG standards are reviewed by pertinent BLM personnel prior to release bythe NWCG. BLM Fire and Aviation Directorate The BLM Fire and Aviation Directorate (FA) consists ofthe Assistant Director, (FA); Deputy Assistant Director, (FA); Fire Operations Division Chief; Aviation Division Chief; Fire Planning and Fuels Management Division Chief; Support Services Division Chief; Budget and Evaluation Division Chief; External Affairs Division Chief; Equal Employment Opportunity Manager; and Fire Safety Program Manager. Program Manager Responsibilities Assistant Director, Fire and Aviation (FA-100) Deputy Assistant Director, Fire and Aviation (FA-100) • Develops policies and standards for firefighting safety, training, prevention, suppression, and use of wildland fires onBLM-managed lands. • Provides guidance to state directors onthe useof prescribed fire and fuels management to achieve management objectives. • Integrates fire and aviation management with natural resource management programs. • Establishes position competencies, standards, and minimum qualifications for fire management officers, fire management specialists, and leaders based on Federal interagency standards. • Reviews and evaluates state fire and aviation management programs. • Represents the BLM inthe coordination of overall fire and aviation management activities atthe National Interagency Fire Center (NIFC) on intra- and interagency fire committees, groups, and working teams. • Establishes priorities in conjunction with Federal fire directors for assignment of critical resources during wildfire emergencies. • Initiates or participates on boards of review concerning actions taken on selected wildland fires. • Negotiates cooperative agreements and/or modifications of existing national level agreements to improve fire and aviation management activities onBLM-managed lands. • Makes determinations on wildland fire management program funding to States and recommends approval tothe BLM Director. • Serves asthe BLM focal point for the significant wildland fire review (SWFR) process and initiates, facilitates, and provides oversight for the SWFR process. The Assistant Director (FA) coordinates with the appropriate state director, assembles a SWFR team, provides a delegation of authority, initiates the SWFR, and provides briefings tothe BLM Director, as appropriate. • Serves as designated contact for the United States Department ofthe Treasury for the certification and revocation of certifying officers (CO) and assistant disbursing officers (ADO) and designated officials for emergency incident payments.
• May provide a Delegation of Authority toa State Fire Management Officer (SFMO) for certifying National Incident Management Systems (NIMS) incident qualifications for BLM Headquarters’ employees that are remotely stationed within their state. Equal Employment Opportunity Manager (FA-120) • Manages the BLM Fire and Aviation Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) Program in accordance with legal, regulatory, and policy requirements. • Manages and directs the counseling program and the alternative dispute resolution (ADR) program in accordance with Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) regulations and BLM policy as well asfor other agencies located at NIFC. • Advises managers and aggrieved persons of employee rights and responsibilities, procedural options, and timeframes in conflict situations, and formulates proposed resolutions. • Negotiates with managers, aggrieved persons, and their representatives to informally resolve EEO matters and executes final settlement agreements. • Manages the Affirmative Employment Program (AEP). • Develops and maintains the accessibility program for the disabled, required under Section 504of the Rehabilitation Actof 1973, as amended, and the Americans with Disability Actof 1990. • Conducts analyses to evaluate progress in meeting EEO program goals. • Administers training activities for the organization. • Provides managers and supervisors with guidance and advice on issues related toEEO/civil rights program activities. • Represents the organization in meetings with public and private groups, universities, minority and women’s organizations, other DOI components, and other Federal agencies. Support Services Division Chief (FA-200) • Manages all aspects ofthe business responsibilities and programs under the jurisdiction of NIFC for the benefit ofthe BLM and cooperating agencies. • Directs the accomplishment ofthe approved operating budget, exercising appropriate control to assure program quality goals are met according to established standards. • Interprets DOI and BLM policies and directives as they affect BLM-NIFC programs. • Participates inthe bureauwide and interagency task force activities asa leader or member. • Oversees NIFC site and facilities management, the NIFC Safety and Health Program, business practices, Human Resources, information resource management (IRM), maintenance and security, Remote Automatic Weather Stations (RAWS) Program, and transportation. • Serves asa focal point and frequent spokesperson for the BLM and the national-level management, assures a public awareness ofBLM programs and coordinates with key officials in affected Federal agencies, States, and occasionally with other entities, such as foreign governments, private individuals, private organizations, vendors, suppliers, transportation groups, or airlines. • Supports the implementation ofBLM automation/modernization/IRM initiatives as they apply toBLM-NIFC. • Supervises the Fire Safety Program Manager who develops and implements safety programs, accident investigation procedures, and safety trend analyses. • Supervises the National Critical Incident Response Program Manager. Fire Operations Division Chief (FA-300) • Serves asthe principal technical expert on fire operations tothe Assistant Director (FA), Deputy Assistant Director (FA), andto the BLM state fire programs. • Provides the Assistant Director (FA) and the Deputy Assistant Director (FA) technical advice, operational oversight, and leadership inall aspects of fire operations. • Performs annual fire program preparedness reviews. Evaluates compliance with policies, objectives, and standards. Assesses operational readiness and provides technical assistance to solve identified problems. Performs other operations reviews as required/requested. • Assists the Assistant Director (FA) and Deputy Assistant Director (FA) inthe formulation and establishment of national policies and programs pertinent to wildland fire preparedness, suppression, shared national resources, safety, training, fire facilities, and equipment. • Serves asthe BLM technical expert on national interagency mobilization and utilization of fire suppression resources. • Develops national plans, standards, and technical guides for the BLM and interagency fire management operations.
• Supervises the Chief, Branch of Preparedness and Suppression Operations (FA-320), responsible for management and oversight ofFA-320 fire management specialists, the Great Basin smokejumpers (FA-321), the National Fire Equipment Program (FA-322), and the National Fire Training and Workforce Development Program (FA-324). • Supervises the Chief, Branch of Preparedness and Suppression Support (FA-330), responsible for management and oversight ofthe FA Veteran Affairs Program, theFA Cooperator Assistance Program, the National Predictive Services Program Manager, the National Interagency Coordination Center (FA-331), the National Radio Operations Section (FA-332), and the Incident Communications Section (FA-333). • Serves asthe BLM representative tothe National Multi-Agency Coordinating Group (NMAC). (Maybe delegated toa branch chief). • Provides daily NMAC briefings tothe Assistant Director (FAD) and Deputy Assistant Director (FAD); and BLM state fire management officers at national preparedness level (PL) 3and above, as warranted. Budget and Evaluation Division Chief (FA-400) • Serves as principal budget advisor ofthe wildland fire program tothe Assistant Director (FAD), Deputy Assistant Director (FAD), BLM Fire Leadership Team (FLT), andto other BLM staffs. • Serves as primary BLM representative inthe DOI wildland fire budget formulation and execution process. • Represents BLMon the DOI Fire Budget Team andat other interagency meetings regarding budget-related policies, requirements, procedures, and reports. • Coordinates all budget activities between Washington Office (WO), Office of Wildland Fire (OWF), and fire and aviation. • Provides national oversight for BLM wildland fire program budget formulation, justification, and execution. Responsible for the development and preparation ofthe budget justifications, planning target allocation, work plan, capability statements, effects statements, and congressional responses. • Reviews NIFC offices atmid-year, third quarter, and end-of-year and distributes available funding in accordance with BLM policy. • Provides oversight of Casual Payment Center. Ensures all DOI casual payments are processed ina timely and cost-effective manner adhering to procedures and practices set forth bythe DOI agencies. Aviation Division Chief (FA-500) • Serves as principal aviation advisor tothe Assistant Director (FAD), Deputy Assistant Director (FAD), other staffs, states, andto the DOI. • Identifies and develops BLM aviation policies, methods, and procedures, as well as standardized technical specifications fora variety of specialized firefighting missions for incorporation into the directives system. • Coordinates aviation-related activities and services between theWO and states with other wildland firefighting, regulatory, investigative, and military agencies. • Coordinates provision and use of aviation resources with business practices, aviation user staffs atthe WOand state office levels. • Represents the BLM at interagency meetings; in interagency committees developing governmentwide aviation policies, requirements, procedures, and reports; andat aviation industry meetings and conventions. • Develops and implements aviation safety programs, accident investigation procedures, and aviation safety trend analyses. • Plans and conducts reviews and evaluations of state aviation programs. • Plans and conducts technical and managerial analyses relating tothe identification of aviation organization and resources appropriate for agency use, cost effectiveness of aviation firefighting, other specialized missions, aircraft acquisition requirements, equipment developmental needs, and related areas. Fire Planning and Fuels Management Division Chief (FA-600) Serves as principal advisor tothe Assistant Director (FAD), Deputy Assistant Director (FAD), FLT, and other BLM staffs for the following wildland fire programs: • Fire Planning – Responsible for the development and implementation ofthe bureauwide fire planning program and policies. Provides guidance and assistance in administering the technical and operational aspects ofBLM’s fire planning program. • Fuels Management – Responsible for the development and coordination ofthe BLM Fuels Management Program to restore and maintain healthy, resilient landscapes, reducing wildfire risks to communities and other values. Recommends the distribution of program funds to regions and tracks all fuels management fund distributions and prior year carryover funds. Develops and maintains a national database for fuels management accomplishments.
• Community Assistance – Responsible for the development and coordination ofthe BLM Community Assistance Program which includes fire prevention, education, mitigation efforts on adjacent non-Federal lands and cooperator assistance. • Fire Investigation and Trespass – Responsible for the development and coordination ofthe BLM fire investigation and trespass programs. • Fire Ecology/Monitoring – Provides guidance on monitoring, plant/fire relationships, landscape fire ecology, fire regimes, and fuels treatment design. • Smoke Management – Responsible for the development and coordination ofthe BLM Smoke Management Program requirements and compliance with State air quality rules and state implementation plans. External Affairs Division Chief (FA-700) • Responsible for coordination of information between the DOI and OWF tothe BLM, BIA, FWS, NPS, USFS, National Association State Foresters (NASF), and Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) at NIFC. • Responsible for coordination ofthe responses to Office of Management and Budget (OMB), Government Accountability Office (GAO), congressional, other elected, and other external inquiries among agencies and departments, establishing and maintaining cooperative relationships resulting in quality work products. • Serves asthe primary manager ofthe External Affairs Program for the NIFC. • Serves asthe primary point of contact to external audiences regarding BLM, andat times, DOI fire and aviation policy. • Serves asthe primary point of contact with theWO and DOI external affairs and communication offices. • Develops recommendations pertaining to external affairs aspects for BLM FAD policies. • Initiates external affairs policies and procedures pertaining to fire and aviation for adoption atthe Department level in conjunction with other departments and agencies. • Serves as personal and direct representative ofthe Assistant Director (FAD) at various meetings and functions with members of congress and staff, State governors and legislatures, officials of local, State and Federal agencies, major private corporations, public and private interest groups, and foreign governments. • Serves as external affairs expert and consultant tothe Assistant Director, (FAD) and the Deputy Assistant Director (FAD) ona variety of issues and policies of controversial nature, providing analysis and advice on public reaction to major policy and program issues. • Responsible for management and contact ofall NIFC and BLM FAD public expressions, including printed material, video productions, and social media products. • Coordinates with BLM legislative affairs on proposed legislation regarding FAD. State Director The state director (SD) is responsible for fire and aviation management programs and activities within the state. TheSD will ensure that employees in their organization meet the requirements outlined inthe Interagency Fire Program Management Qualifications Standards and Guide will ensure training is completed to support delegations to line managers. District Manager The district manager (DM) is responsible tothe SDfor the safe and efficient implementation of fire and aviation management activities within their district. This includes cooperative activities with other agencies or landowners. Agency Administrator An agency administrator isa BLM line manager (e.g., state director, district manager, or field manager) or their designated acting, who has met the specific training requirements outlined below and has wildland fire decision authority fora defined area, as specified by delegation. Allre-delegations must be consistent with BLM Manual Section 1203, BLM Handbook 1203-1, and state supplements. Line managers must obtain the AADM qualification within two years of being appointed toa designated management position so that they may fulfill their duties asan AADM. This qualification ensures the agency administrators meet the “Management Performance Requirements for Fire Operations” stated inthe Interagency Standards for Fire and Fire Aviation Operations, chapter 2. ABLM line manager or their designated acting may not exercise certain authorities until all required training is complete and the agency administrator (AADM) qualification has been awarded inthe Incident Qualifications and Certification System (IQCS). Training and Qualification Requirements for Agency Administrator (AADM): • IS-700, An Introduction tothe National Incident Management System – available online; and • ICS-100, Introduction tothe Incident Command System – available online; and
• M-581, Fire Program Management – An Overview - presented atthe geographic area level (attendance at Local Fire Management Leadership (LFML) or National Fire Management Leadership (NFML) prior to October 2017 satisfies this specific training requirement.); and • Complete onthe job training by “shadowing” a qualified BLM AADM and documenting experience onthe BLM AADM Position Task Sheet. OR • Prior qualification asan AADM by another agency/Bureau as determined by IQCS Certifying Official. OR • Prior employment asa District/Zone Fire Management Officer. BLM agency administrator qualifications and training will be entered inthe IQCS. Upon certification asan AADM, the employee will have the AADM competency awarded inthe IQCS. State Fire Management Officer The state fire management officer (SFMO) is responsible and accountable for providing leadership for fire and aviation management programs atthe state level. The SFMO is responsible and accountable for providing planning, coordination, training, technical guidance, and oversight tothe state fire and aviation management programs. The SFMO also represents theSD on interagency geographic area coordination groups and multi-agency coordination (MAC) groups. The SFMO provides feedback to district/zone fire staff regarding performance requirements. District/Zone Fire Management Officer The district/zone fire management officer (DFMO/ZFMO) is responsible and accountable for providing leadership for fire and aviation management programs atthe local level. The DFMO/ZFMO: • Determines local fire program requirements to implement land use decisions through the Fire Management Plan (FMP) to meet land management objectives; • Negotiates interagency agreements and represents the district manager/manager on local interagency fire and fire aviation working groups; • Meets the DFMO/ZFMO assigned program responsibilities; and • Fulfills safety and health responsibilities. District/Zone Fire Management Officer and Assistant Fire Management Officer Selective Factors Selective factors for all BLM district/zone assistant fire management officer (DAFMO/ZAFMO) positions shall mirror those ofthe DFMO/ZFMO inthe district/zone in which the position is being flown. • High-Complexity Districts/Zones – NWCG qualifications must bein either pathway 1or 2, currency not required. ○ Pathway 1 – division group supervisor (DIVS) and incident commander (IC) – type 3 (ICT3), or prescribed burn boss – type 2 (RXB2) ○ Pathway 2 – air support group supervisor (ASGS) and ICT3 ○ Completion of Fire Program Management, an Overview, M-581, will bea condition of employment, tobe completed within one year of official hiring date. • Moderate-Complexity Districts/Zones – NWCG qualifications must bein either pathway 1or 2, currency not required. ○ Pathway 1 – task force leader (TFLD) and ICT3 or RXB2 ○ Pathway 2 – helibase manager (HEBM) and ICT3 ○ Completion of Fire Program Management, an Overview, M-581, will bea condition of employment, tobe completed within one year of official hiring date. Management Performance Requirements for Fire Operations State directors (SDs) and district managers (DMs) have both authority and responsibility within the wildland fire management program. The BLM Manual Section 1203 (MS-1203) – Delegation of Authority provides a primary authoritative source ofthe organizational location of authority. TheMS-1203 defines authority asthe ability to make the final, binding decision orto take specific action, or both, asan official representing the United States Government. Such authorities have a legal basis in statute or regulation. Authority to make a decision or take an action is different from having responsibility.
In addition tothe national-level MS-1203 andH-1203-1, each state may have a supplemental manual and handbook that are consistent with theMS-1203 andH-1203-1. BLM offices should ensure adherence tothe MS-1203 andH- 1203-1as well asthe relevant state supplements. Additional information for exercising some fire related authorities canbe found inthe Agency Administrator Tool Boxat https://doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/blm-fa/fire- operations/SitePages/Agency%20Administrator%20Toolbox.aspx. The following tables show many ofthe authorities as well asthe assigned responsibilities for the wildland fire management program. H-1203-1 Appendix Subject Code Authority SDDM Notes 1111 1. Enter into Cost Share agreements for multi-jurisdictional wildfires. XXIf SDor DMare not AADM qualified, they may not exercise this authority but may redelegate it. May only bere-delegated toa qualified BLM Agency Administrator (AADM) orthe Alaska State Fire Management Officer (SFMO). See items Aand D below for additional direction on exercising andre-delegating this authority. 9200 2. Expend funds and assign personnel for management of wildfires. XXIf SDor DMare not AADM qualified, they may not exercise this authority but may redelegate it. May only be redelegated toan IC, fire Operational Duty Officer, a qualified BLM Agency Administrator (AADM), orthe Alaska SFMO. See items A, B, Cand D below for additional direction on exercising andre-delegating this authority. 9210 3. Make decisions as part ofthe Geographic Multi-Agency Coordinating Group as they affect BLM lands to establish fire priorities, allocate andre-allocate fire suppression resources. X Delegated to SFMO. 9210 4. Authority to expend upto the State authorization limit for discretionary preposition and short-term fire severity needs. XMay only bere-delegated tothe SFMO. 9210 5. Enter into state and/or local level fire agreements, in support ofthe national level fire agreements, to facilitate mutual assistance for prevention, training, pre- suppression and suppression. XX 9210 6. Approve fire operating plans committing funds and/or resources in support of national, state, and/or local level agreements for mutual assistance. XX
Subject Code Authority SDDM Notes 9210 7. Enter into agreements to provide for the management and administrative functions of combined agency-operated fire facilities. XX 9211 8. Approve Fire Management Plans (FMPs). XX Cannot bere-delegated. 9211 9. Approve Wildfire decisions. XX1 IfSD orDM are not AADM qualified, they may not exercise this authority but may redelegate it. May only bere-delegated toa qualified BLM Agency Administrator (AADM). See item A below for additional direction on exercising andre-delegating this authority. 1 Alaska wildfire decisions require an additional approval from the protecting agency fire management officer asper the Alaska Statewide Annual Operating Plan. In addition, Alaska wildfire decisions affecting Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (ANCSA) Corporation lands and DOI lands not managed byBLM require an additional approval from the Alaska Fire Service (AFS) asthe fiscally responsible agent. Fiscal approvals for these wildfires with costs less than $5 million are delegated toAFS Zone Fire Management Officers. Fiscal approvals for these wildfires with costs of $5 million and above are delegated tothe Alaska State FMO/Alaska Fire Service Manager. 9212 10. Close areas under the administration ofthe BLM during periods of high hazard to prevent fires. X 9212 11. Issue fire prevention orders that close entry to, or restrict useof, designated public lands. X 9214 12. Approve prescribed fire plans. XXIf SDor DMare not AADM qualified, they may not exercise this authority but may redelegate it. May only bere-delegated toa qualified BLM Agency Administrator (AADM) orthe Alaska State SFMO. See items Aand D below for additional direction on exercising andre-delegating this authority. 9215 13. Certify National Incident Management Systems (NIMS) incident qualifications for employees. X1X 1 Delegated to State FMO. See chapter 13for further details regarding certification of area command and complex command and general staff positions. 9218 14. Approve individual fire reports. XMay only bere-delegated to District FMO.
Subject Code Authority SDDM Notes 9230 15. Determine liability for unauthorized useon public lands. Accept payment in full. Dispose resources and recover funds. XX 9400 16. Approve useof government owned (BLM) aircraft for official travel. XSee BLM National Aviation Plan Chapters 2and 3. A. Exercising the Authority as AADM: To exercise these authorities an individual must possess the AADM qualification and must also be either a line manager (e.g., state director (SD), district manager (DM), or field manager (FM)) or associate line manager by position organizational title with either MS-1203/H-1203-1 auto- delegation or separate written delegation, oran individual must be designated and delegated asthe acting line manager. In other words, an individual that isnot a line manager in their regular position but has the AADM qualification maybe designated fora specific period and delegated asthe acting line manager in order to exercise these authorities. (SeeMS-1203, section 3.4 Designating Acting Officials, A. Rotating Schedules for recording actings, andB. Unique Situations for when there maybe two actings for the same position.) Redelegation to Qualified AADM: Ifthe SDor DMis not qualified asan AADM, they mayre-delegate these authorities toa qualified AADM. Ifan MS-1203 state supplement auto re-delegates this authority to additional BLM line managers (e.g., FMs), those additional line managers must be qualified AADMs to further re- delegate. Ifthe additional managers are not qualified AADMs, anyre-delegation must be done bythe DM. B. Redelegation to Incident Commander (IC): This authority may only be redelegated toa qualified IC. The BLM line manager (or their designated acting) providing the delegation toan IC must also bea qualified AADM. C. Redelegation to fire Operational Duty Officer (ODO): When this authority isre-delegated toa fire operational duty officer, the individual must meet any qualification requirements identified inthe unit operating plan and perform the duties outlined inthe BLM Operational Duty Officer section of Chapter 2. There- delegation toa fire operational duty officer comes from the BLM line manager that supervises the unit’s fire program regardless of whether the line manager isa qualified AADM ornot. D. The Alaska SFMO is delegated these authorities dueto the unique responsibilities and organizational structure ofBLM Alaska to maintain and operate the DOI wildland fire suppression organization in Alaska, and the responsibility to provide those services on lands requiring protection under the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act, as amended 43U.S. C. 1620(e)), as provided in620 DM5, as well a PL105-65, Title XXX, Sec. 3011 and 3014. ASSIGNED PROGRAM RESPONSIBILITY SDDM BLM Agency Administrator 1. Provide a written delegation of authority to FMOs that gives them an adequate level of operational authority. If fire management responsibilities are zoned, ensure that all appropriate AADMs have signed the delegation. XX2. Ensure only trained and qualified personnel are available to support wildland fire operations atthe local and national level. XX3. Annually convene and participate in preseason and postseason fire meetings. XX4. Review critical operations and safety policies and procedures with fire and fire aviation personnel. XX5. Complete timely response and follow-upto fire preparedness and program reviews. XX6. Ensure fire and fire aviation preparedness reviews are conducted annually inall unit offices. Participate inat least one review annually. XX
ASSIGNED PROGRAM RESPONSIBILITY SDDM BLM Agency Administrator 7. Ensure proper level of investigation types are conducted per chapter 18. XX8. Ensure resource advisors are identified, trained, and available for incident assignment. Refer tothe Federal Wildland Fire Qualifications Supplement. X9. Provide written notification tothe: • State director when Federal combined expenditures foran incident, ora complex of incidents, meet or exceed $5 million and more than 50% ofthe burned acres are managed bythe BLM (in Alaska, more than 50% ofthe burned acres are managed byDOI and/or Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act [ANCSA] Corporations). • BLM Director, through the state director, when Federal combined expenditures foran incident, ora complex of incidents, meet or exceed $10 million AND more than 50% ofthe burned acres are managed bythe BLM (in Alaska, more than 50% ofthe burned acres are managed byDOI and/or ANCSA Corporations). Notifications should be emailed with a copy tothe Assistant Director (FAD). X110. Ensure trespass actions are initiated and documented to recover cost of suppression activities, land rehabilitation, and damages tothe resource and improvements for all human-caused fires where liability canbe determined, asper Fire Trespass Handbook, H-9238-1. X11. Ensure completion ofAir Quality Exceedance Review. XXX12. Ensure prescribed fire activities comply with State Smoke Management Program and Clean Air Act. Participate inAir Quality Exceedance Notice of Violation review. XXX13. Approve the State Fire Trespass Operating Plan. X14. Ensure prescribed fire activities comply with interagency, national, and state office policy. Participate in periodic reviews ofthe prescribed fire program. XX15. Ensure safety program isin place, hasa current plan, and has an active safety committee that includes the fire program. XX16. Establish and annually update a Serious Incident or Fatality (SIOF) Response Plan. XX17. Ensure that a current emergency medical response plan isin place and accessible. X18. Personally visit fires each year (see appendix A). X19. Provide an AADM briefing to incident management teams (IMT). (See appendix D.) X20. Attend post-fire closeout on type 1and type 2 complexity fires. Attendance maybe delegated. X21. Sign and date the Agency Administrator Ignition Authorization (PMS 484-1, element 2A) with the time frame identified before the prescribed fire is ignited. X
ASSIGNED PROGRAM RESPONSIBILITY SDDM BLM Agency Administrator 22. Ensure monitoring of smoke and communication of potential impacts from smoke is considered for all wildfires (Wildland Fire and Air Quality Coordination Secretarial MOU between USDA, DOI, EPA and CDC (https://www.usda.gov/sites/default/files/documents/usda- epa-doi-cdc-mou.pdf). Agency Administrators should consider ordering anAir Resource Advisor to work as part of IMTs when concerns regarding public health, transportation safety, or personnel safety issues from smoke are elevated asper Public Law 116-9, the Dingell Act, 2019, when appropriate to address smoke impacts. XX1 In Alaska, notifications will be made bythe State FMO/Alaska Fire Service Manager and will include the District Manager ifBLM lands were burned. Post-Incident Review Manager’s Supplement for Post-Incident Review (appendix B) emphasizes the factors that are critical for ensuring safe and efficient wildland fire suppression and provides examples for managers touse in their review of incident operations and ICs. Fire Staff Performance Requirements for Fire Operations ASSIGNED PROGRAM RESPONSIBILITY State FMO District/Zone FMO1. Establish and manage a safe, effective, and efficient fire program. XX2. Ensure Fire Management Plan (FMP) is reviewed annually and maintained or revised to meet content requirements provided inthe H-9211-1 Fire Planning Handbook and the BLM FMP Template available atthe time ofthe FMP’s signature. Ensure annual reviews are completed and signed using BLM’sFMP Annual Review Checklist provided inthe BLM FMP Template. X3. Ensure individual fire reports are accurate and are certified/approved inthe Interagency Fire Occurrence Reporting Modules (InFORM). X4. Ensure only trained and qualified personnel are assigned to fire and fire aviation duties. XX5. Ensure only trained and qualified fire and non-fire personnel are available to support fire operations atthe local and national levels. XX6. Organize, train, equip, and direct a qualified work force. XX7. Ensure the fire safety program is implemented according to fire and non-fire safety regulations, training, and concerns. XX8. Ensure compliance with work/rest guidelines during all fire and fire aviation activities. XX9. Ensure completion ofa risk assessment (RA) for fire and fire aviation activities and non-fire activities so mitigation measures are taken to reduce risk. XX10. Ensure fire and fire aviation management employees understand their role, responsibilities, scope of duty, and accountability. XX11. Establish and implement a post-incident assignment performance review process. XX12. Develop, implement, evaluate, and document fire and fire aviation training to meet current and anticipated needs. XX13. Ensure fire and fire aviation policies are understood, implemented, and coordinated with other agencies as appropriate. XX14. Monitor fire suppression activities to recognize when complexity levels exceed program capabilities. Increase managerial and operational resources to meet the need. XX
ASSIGNED PROGRAM RESPONSIBILITY State FMO District/Zone FMO15. Monitor fire season severity predictions, fire behavior, and fire activity levels. Ensure national fire severity funding and national preposition funding is requested ina timely manner, used, and documented in accordance with agency standards. XX16. Monitor the expenditure of short-term severity and state discretionary preposition funding. XX17. Ensure agreements with cooperators are valid andin compliance with agency policy, and that attached operating plans are current. XX18. Implement current operational plans (e.g., dispatch, preparedness, prevention, draw-down). Ensure that initial response plans reflect agreements and operating plans and are reviewed annually prior to fire season. X19. Ensure that initial response plans (e.g., run cards, preplanned response) arein place and provide for initial response commensurate with guidance provided in land and resource management plans (L/RMP) and associated FMPs. X20. Develop, maintain, and implement restrictions procedures in coordination with cooperators whenever possible. XX21. Ensure that the use of fire funds complies with Department and agency policies. XX22. Ensure a process is established to communicate fire information tothe public, media, and cooperators. XX23. Convene and participate in annual preseason-and postseason fire meetings. XX24. Oversee preseason preparedness review of fire and fire aviation programs. XX25. Initiate, conduct, and/or participate in fire program management reviews and investigations asper chapter 18. XX26. Participate in periodic site visits to individual incidents and projects. XX27. Utilize the NWCG Wildland Fire Risk and Complexity Assessment, PMS 236 to ensure the proper level of management is assigned toall incidents. XX28. Ensure transfer of command on incidents occurs asper chapter 11. X29. Ensure incoming personnel and crews are briefed prior to fire and fire aviation assignments. X30. Ensure that an accurate and defensible decision is published inthe Wildland Fire Decision Support System (WFDSS) for all fires identified as requiring a decision in chapter 11. XX31. Ensure IMT briefing packages are developed prior to fire season. X32. Work with cooperators, groups, and individuals to develop and implement processes and procedures for providing fire safe communities within the wildland urban interface. XX33. Ensure trespass actions are initiated and documented to recover cost of suppression activities, land rehabilitation, and damages tothe resource/improvements for all human-caused fires where liability canbe determined. XX34. Ensure personnel performing fire cause determination and fire trespass are properly trained. XX35. Ensure compliance with interagency, national, and state office policy for prescribed fire activities. Provide periodic reviews ofthe prescribed fire program. XX36. Establish the SIOF Response Plan and update annually. XX37. Ensure that all fire employees annually review and update emergency contact information, either in Employee Express orin hardcopy format. XX
ASSIGNED PROGRAM RESPONSIBILITY State FMO District/Zone FMO38. Ensure fire season severity predictions, weather forecasts, fire behavior predictors, and fire activity levels are monitored and communicated daily (hard copy, webpage, email, radio, orfax) toall employees. XX39. Ensure standards in current national and local mobilization guides are followed. XX40. Comply with established property control/management procedures. XX Delegation of Authority Delegation for State Fire Management Officers In order to effectively perform their duties, an SFMO must have certain authorities delegated from the state director. This delegation is normally issued annually following re-delegation direction inthe MS-1203. The delegation of authority should include what authorities found inthe “Management Performance Requirements for Fire Operations” table above are being re-delegated. The delegation of authority may also include items from the “Assigned Program Responsibilities” section ofthe table; however, there should bea clear delineation between authority being delegated and assignment of responsibility. “Appendix C” provides a sample delegation of authority. Delegation for District/Zone Fire Management Officers In order to effectively perform their duties, a DFMO/ZFMO must have certain authorities delegated from the district manager. This delegation is normally issued annually following re-delegation direction inthe MS-1203. The delegation of authority should include authorities found inthe “Management Performance Requirements for Fire Operations” table above are being re-delegated. The delegation of authority may also include items from the “Assigned Program Responsibilities” section ofthe table; however, there should bea clear delineation between authority being delegated and assignment of responsibility. “Appendix C” provides a sample delegation of authority. Preparedness Reviews The Review and Update ofthe 1995 Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy (January 2001) states that, “Agencies will ensure their capability to provide safe, cost-effective fire management programs in support of land and resource management plans through appropriate planning, staffing, training, equipment, and management oversight.” The Assistant Director (FA) accomplishes this in part through the fire preparedness review process. Fire preparedness reviews assess fire programs for compliance with established fire policies and procedures as outlined inthe current Interagency Standards for Fire and Fire Aviation Operations and other pertinent policy documents. Reviews identify organizational, operational, procedural, personnel, or equipment deficiencies, and recommend specific corrective actions. BLM Review Schedules • BLM districts conduct fire preparedness reviews annually. • BLM state offices conduct statewide fire preparedness reviews every two years. • The BLM national office conducts national fire preparedness reviews of each BLM state fire program every four years. Fire Leadership Team The FLT consists ofthe Assistant Director (FA), Deputy Assistant Director (FA), state fire management officers, division chiefs (FA), and the EEO Manager (FA). The FLT directs the fire and aviation program by implementing policy and guiding strategic and practical decisions. The FLT has several chartered subgroups that accomplish work to support the FLT and BLM fire and aviation program. BLM Operational Duty Officer Each BLM unit fire management officer will perform the duties ofan operational duty officer (ODO) or will provide a delegated ODO for their units during any period of predicted incident activities. ODO responsibilities maybe performed byany individual with a signed delegation of authority from the BLM line manager that supervises the unit’s fire program. Qualifications for the ODO will be identified within the local unit Fire Operating Plan. The required duties for all BLM ODOs are: • Monitor unit incident activities for compliance with BLM safety policies. • Coordinate and set priorities for unit suppression actions and resource allocation.
• Keep unit AADMs, suppression resources, and information officers informed ofthe current and expected situation. • Plan for and implement actions required for future needs. • Document all decisions and actions. ODOs will provide operational oversight of these requirements as well asany unit specific duties assigned by local fire managers through the local unit Fire Operating Plan. Operational duty officers will not fill any Incident Command System (https://www.fema.gov/emergency-managers/nims/components#icsr) functions connected toany incident. Ifthe ODOis required to accept an incident assignment, the FMO will ensure that another qualified and authorized ODOis in place prior tothe departure ofthe outgoing ODO. State and National Duty Officers Each state will maintain a state-level duty officer (DO) during fire season and dedicated telephone number. State DOs are responsible for: • Establishing a process to identify available assets or needs within their state; • Communicating availability ofor need for assets to other state DOs; • Approving asset assignments; • Facilitating movement of assets using established dispatch/coordination system protocols; and • Ensuring emergency notifications are made tothe national DO. The National Duty Officer number is208-387-5876. The national DOis responsible for: • Providing coordination and prioritization of prepositioned assets between States ifthe need arises; • Resolving disagreements of asset priorities and/or mobilizations by elevating issues tothe Division Chief, Fire Operations (FA-300) or designee; • Facilitating movement of assets using established dispatch/coordination system protocols; • Providing briefings and updates tothe Division Chief, Fire Operations/BLM NMAC representative as requested; and • Ensuring emergency notifications are made according toFA protocols. Incident Business A consolidated view of fire business practices, supporting policy, and regulation is contained inthe BLM Standards for Fire Business Management. BLM Fire Management Position Titles and Fire Department Cooperator Equivalencies BLM units that choose touse fire department cooperator nomenclature will utilize the following BLM position title equivalency standard. BLM Fire Management Position Title Fire Department Cooperator Equivalency State FMO, district/zone FMO Chief State AFMO, district/zone AFMO Deputy chief State office fire staff Assistant chief Field office FMO, center manager, district/zone fire management specialist, district/zone fuels specialist, fire operations coordinator Division chief Fire operations specialist, fuels specialist, assistant center manager, prevention/education specialist Battalion chief Prevention technician, prevention/education specialist Prevention officer Hotshot superintendent, helicopter manager Superintendent Engine captain, hotshot foreman, assistant helicopter manager, fuels module leader Captain Assistant engine captain Engineer Communications technician Comm. Mechanic Repair
Agreements with Cooperators (Rangeland Fire Protection Association and Local Fire Department) The BLM should have a cooperative fire response agreement with any Rangeland Fire Protection Association (RFPA) and local fire department (i.e., rural, volunteer, and city) that responds to wildfire incidents on lands under BLM protection. These cooperative fire response agreements canbe established directly with individual BLM units or administered through a statewide cooperative agreement where BLMis a party. When entering into cooperative fire response agreements, BLM will ensure the following minimum required elements are included inthe agreement. • RFPA/local fire department personnel responding to incidents onBLM-managed lands must: ○ Be18 years ofage or older; ○ Have and use the required personal protective equipment (PPE) found in chapter 7; and ○ RFPA requirement: Have a basic level of wildland fire training, identified asthe NWCG course S-190 and S-130, which canbe modified tofit local needs. I-100is not required, but ICS must be thoroughly covered within the applicable section ofS-190 and S-130; or ○ Local fire department requirement: Have a basic level of wildland fire training. The NWCG course S-190 and S-130 are recommended, both courses canbe modified tofit local needs. • Preidentified incident communication protocols (e.g., frequencies plans, points of contact, and interoperable radio hardware) will be established and followed. • ICS will be used to manage all incidents. Safety and Occupational Health Program Safety and Occupational Health Program responsibilities are interwoven throughout BLM program areas, including fire management. Safety ofour employees lies within every level ofthe organization and program implementation can have a direct impact on firefighting personnel. To ensure that program requirements are met to support the fire and aviation management program, the following table shall be utilized. Safety and Health Responsibilities for the Fire Program PERFORMANCE REQUIRED State Safety Manager District/ Zone Safety Manager District/ Zone FMO District/ Field Manager 1. An annual unit safety plan is developed, approved, and signed bythe unit AADM. XXX2. Risk assessments (RAs) are completed for suppression-and non-suppression-related activities and crews are briefed onRAs prior to beginning work. XXX3. An individual has been designated asthe unit safety officer. XX4. Maintains a working relationship with all facets ofthe fire organization, including outstations. XXX5. A safety committee or group, which includes fire representation, is organized to monitor safety and health concerns and activities. XXX6. Written safety and health programs required by OSHA arein place and being implemented to include fire personnel. XX7. Employees are provided mandatory safety and health training, including the “Fire and Aviation Employee Orientation Checklist. XXX8. Fire safety programs (e.g., SAFENET, 6 Minutes for Safety, safety alerts) are known and being utilized. X9. Safety publications are available toall fire employees (e.g., Incident Response Pocket Guide, DOI Occupational Safety and Health Program – Field Manual). X
PERFORMANCE REQUIRED State Safety Manager District/ Zone Safety Manager District/ Zone FMO District/ Field Manager 10. Assures that the risk management process is integrated into all major policies, management decisions, and the planning and performance of every job. (BLM Manual 1112). X11. Procedures arein place to monitor work capacity test (WCT) results and ensure medical examination policies are followed. X12. Safety Data Sheets (SDS) are present, accessible, and available for all hazardous materials used and stored inthe work area. XX13. Procedures arein place to purchase nonstandard equipment as identified inthe risk assessment process andto ensure compliance with consensus standards (e.g., American National Standards Institute [ANSI], National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health [NIOSH]). XXX14. Personal protective equipment supplied, is serviceable, and being utilized. XX15. Ensures tailgate safety meetings are held and documented. X16. Monitors and inspects operations and work sites for unsafe acts and conditions and promptly takes appropriate preventative and corrective measures. (BLM Manual 1112) X17. Procedures arein place for reporting unsafe and unhealthful working conditions. XX18. Injury data is monitored and reviewed to determine trends affecting the health and welfare of employees. XX19. Ensures facility and work area inspections are conducted to ensure requirements are met (29CFR 1960 and 485 DM, chapter 5 requirements). XXX20. Promptly reports and investigates all job-related accidents/incidents that result inor have the potential to cause fatalities, injuries, illnesses, property, or environmental damage. All such reports are electronically submitted tothe Safety Management Information System (SMIS). (BLM Manual 1112) XX Employee Safety and Health Program Responsibility All employees are responsible for ensuring safe and healthful work practices. • Comply with applicable work rules, practices, and procedures. • Use safety devices, PPE, clothing, and other means provided or directed by policy atall times. • Report unsafe and unhealthful working conditions to management. • Report job-related accidents/incidents tothe supervisor that results in, orhas the potential to harm, people, property, orthe environment. • Report personal conditions that could adversely affect the ability to perform ina safe and healthful manner onthe job. • Complete the Fire and Aviation Employee Orientation Checklist.
Emergency Notification and Contact Information All employees are required to review and update their emergency contact information annually, either in Employee Express orin hardcopy format. This information will only be used for emergency purposes and only by those authorized to contact the employee and/or their personal contact(s) and will be maintained in accordance with the provisions ofthe Privacy Actof 1974. Injury ona BLM Fire After emergency response actions, deliver an injured employee tothe immediate medical care facility; prompt notification through the chain of command is essential to ensure proper management support tothe employee. The responsible unit FMO/ODO will notify their state DO (orFOG representative) immediately. The state DO (orFOG representative) will then ensure the appropriate local agency GACC operational representative is notified. BLM Employee Injury Follow the unit SIOF or notification procedures. BLM Operational Medical Support BLM Operational Medical Support Program The BLM Operational Medical Support Program (OMSP) is authorized under the BLM Fire and Aviation Directorate. The primary objective isto take care ofBLM employees while working in remote and potentially hazardous conditions where traditional emergency medical services (EMS) maybe significantly delayed or unavailable. The Operational Medical Support Program Manual outlines the procedural framework and establishes national standards including provider training and certification standards, patient care protocols, and standardized equipment requirements. Additionally, the OMSP authorizes providers to administer medical support in accordance with the Operational Medical Support EMR and EMT Protocols atthe level of their individual certification, while performing the duties of their position regardless of location. The National Program Manager and National Medical Director are located at NIFC. Additional information canbe found onthe BLM Fire Operations SharePoint. Operational Medical Support Committee The Operational Medical Support Committee (OMSC) is formed under the Fire Operations Group (FOG) and provides national leadership inall areas ofBLM Operational Medical Support. The OMSC consists of representatives from all BLM states and programs and provides leadership and direction tothe OMSP. Emergency Medical Responder (EMR)/ Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) Provider Requirements and Qualifications Providers must meet the following requirements tobe authorized to practice under the OMSP: • BLM employee. • Current Red Card. • Certified asan EMR, EMT, or higher, with a current National Registry of Emergency Medical Technicians (NREMT) Certification, or State license/certification. • To initially gain and maintain authorization to practice, providers must complete medical director specified training anda hands-on proficiency evaluation every 13 months. Employee Advocacy Fire operations doctrine acknowledges the inherent danger of fire operations and the potential for serious injury or death to firefighters. When death or injuries occurs, employees must be provided the best and most appropriate care and support possible. Managers should consult the Bureau of Land Management Loss of Human Life Handbook (LOHL). Fire and Aviation Honor Guard The BLM Fire and Aviation Honor Guard (Honor Guard) represents the highest ideals of honor, dignity, professionalism, and respect in serving the agency, the fire community, and the families, friends, andco-workers of those who have lost their lives inthe line of duty. The Honor Guard was established to appropriately pay tribute toand honor the memory of employees who perish inthe line of duty. The Honor Guard also responds to requests for their participation at events of State and national significance. The Honor Guard is comprised ofa cross-section ofthe BLM workforce from within the fire and aviation program. A commitment tothe program directly impacts fellow members and the ability ofthe team to function atthe highest level possible. Members will be expected to commit forno less than atwo-year period and may remain an Honor
Guard member until they canno longer fulfill the commitment or wish to retire from the Honor Guard. Members must stay in good standing inthe BLM. For more information visit the Honor Guard website. Mobile Fire Equipment Policy Introduction The following section represents a general overview ofthe BLM Mobile Fire Equipment Policy. Mobile fire equipment canbe further described as fire vehicles, WCF equipment, UTV trailers, etc. Most policy related items can also be referenced at https://doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/blm-fa/fire-operations/SitePages/NFEP-Policy- Resources.aspx. National Fire Equipment Program The BLM National Fire Equipment Program (NFEP) is responsible for the design, development, and acquisition of specialized wildland mobile fire equipment to meet the full range of fire management requirements. Design and development are accomplished through the analysis of performance needs required by field units and working with industry experts to produce prototypes for testing and eventually production units. Acquisition of equipment is accomplished primarily through contracting. The NFEP balances advanced technology with cost efficiency to provide maximum safety for personnel while effectively meeting fire management needs defined by fire equipment committees and approved bythe Fire Operation Group (FOG). Fire Equipment Committees State committees report tothe respective SFMO orFOG representative. National-level BLM committees include the Fire Equipment Group, Dozer/Heavy Equipment, Engine, Helitack, and Hand Crew committees which report tothe FOG. Equipment committees are encouraged to invite other agency equipment leads to share ideas, transfer technology, and coordinate efforts. Policy and Guidance Agency policy requires that fire equipment be maintained ata high level of performance andin a condition consistent with the work is designed to perform. This shall be accomplished through application ofa uniform preventative maintenance program, timely repair of damaged components andin accordance with agency requirements. Repairs shall be made as they are identified to keep the equipment functional andin peak operating condition. Repair expenses that are not considered normal wear and tear are the responsibility ofthe benefiting activity and not the Working Capital Fund (WCF). Equipment Bulletins and Equipment Alerts The purpose ofan Equipment Bulletin (EB) oran Equipment Alert (EA) isto share accurate and timely information regarding potential equipment problems and/or needed repairs. TheEB is intended to inform equipment users of recommendations for repairs, potential hazards, or general information related tothe overall maintenance, awareness, and safe operation of fire equipment. TheEA is time sensitive and addresses potentially serious hazards or risk anda specific action the user must act upon. Unexpected issues involving wildland fire vehicles which donot fall under other types of wildland fire reviews and investigations and/or other applicable Federal, State, or specific agency requirements must be reported. Ifan unexpected vehicle issue warrants attention, the NFEP Manager through the Operations Advisory Team and the Capital Equipment Committee will issue theEB orEA. Members of these groups must ensure the information reaches all levels ofthe organization. Acquisition of Working Capital Fund Equipment All BLM WCF 600-class mobile fire equipment must be ordered through the NFEP. The National Operations Center (NOC) manages the WCF and the NFEP implements the NOC’s direction. Each class of vehicle hasan established lifecycle based on miles or hours; vehicle age may be factored into replacement lifecycle if/when vehicles are underutilized. The WCF acquires funds through fixed ownership rates (FOR) and use rates determined bythe replacement cost plus the residual value and class repair costs throughout the equipment lifecycle. Atthe endof the lifecycle, funds generated are used to replace the equipment. For new vehicle purchases, funds are acquired/secured bythe receiving unit andif approved, the new purchase is added tothe WCF. The NOC monitors vehicle usage and replacement cycles and notifies the NFEP when vehicles need tobe replaced. The NFEP then coordinates with the receiving unit to order the replacement vehicle. When the order is placed, the NFEP works with the BLM Fleet Manager, the State FOG representative (or designee), the receiving unit, contracting, and the vendor to fill the order. Acquisition ofnew WCF 600-class mobile fire equipment that exceeds the BLM’s fleet capis authorized under the following terms:
• Vehicles support fire management actions identified in approved land/resource management plans and their associated fire management plans. Vehicles will be purchased with funds approved bythe FAD. • New vehicle purchases require completion and approval ofa BLM Fire and Aviation WCF 600-Class Request, Form 1520-058 Vehicle or Equipment Justification and Approval, and Form 1510-18v Obligating Funds for Acquisition of Working Capital Fund Assets. Forms canbe found at https://doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/blm- fa/fire-operations/SitePages/NFEP-Policy-Resources.aspx?web=1. • All replacement BLM WCF 600-class vehicle purchases require completion and approval of Form 1520-058 Vehicle or Equipment Justification and Approval and may require Form 1510-18v Obligating Funds for Acquisition of Working Capital Fund Assets (if additional funds are required for option selection). Funding Specialized equipment maybe funded through various mechanisms, including theFA, special project allocations, available mid- or year-end funds, state or local funding, interagency agreement, or through the WCF. Procurement of nonstandard equipment with fire management funds when standard equipment is available must have written approval bythe Fire Operations Division Chief (FA-300) and the SFMO. Most fire vehicles are funded through the WCF. Other types of fire equipment are funded through the normal budget process atthe state and/or local level. BLM Mobile Fire Equipment Ordering Ordering ofBLM mobile fire equipment shall be accomplished through the NFEP utilizing the Fire Equipment Ordering System (FEOS) or like system. All orders are routed from the NFEP through the State FOG representative or designee. Summary specifications canbe found at https://doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/blm-fa/fire- operations/SitePages/Equipment-Specifications.aspx. Contact the NFEP for additional information. States have the authority to order equipment using WCF funds; however, prior to ordering, approval is required from the WCF Fleet Manager, SFMO, and the Fire Operations Division Chief (FA-300). BLM WCF 600-Class Command Vehicle Procurement Standards The BLM WCF 600-class vehicles below have been developed and configured specifically for the roles/asset types listed. New, replacement, or upgraded procurements outside ofthe listed roles/asset types requires SFMO and Fire Operations Division Chief (FA-300) approval, and when utilizing fuels funds, Fire Planning and Fuels Management Division Chief (FA-600) approval, utilizing the WCF 600-Class Request Form found at https://doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/blm-fa/fire-operations/SitePages/NFEP-Policy-Resources.aspx. An electronic copy ofall approvals shall be provided tothe appropriate NFEP Manager prior to order. • District/Unit AFMO, Fire Operations Coordinator, Fire Operations Specialist/Technician, Fuels Specialist/Technician: 651/653/654/655/656/657/658 command truck (choose 1). • Hotshot crew: 652 superintendent or658 utility truck (2 total), 644 crew carrier (2 each), and (optional) utility task vehicle and trailer (1 each). • Hand crew: 644 crew carrier, 651/653/654/657/658 command truck, 652 superintendent truck. • Helitack crew: 651/653/654/657/658 command truck, 652 superintendent truck, 661 helitack support. • Wildland Fire Module: 651/653/654/657/658 command truck, 652 superintendent truck, 661 helitack support. Fire Equipment Standardization Standardization of fire equipment aids inthe ability to produce equipment that effectively meets the BLM’s mission by providing cost-effective equipment with the least impact on fire programs. Standardization also contributes tothe ability to provide effective, consistent, and quality training tothe BLM fire and aviation program workforce. Respective committees have the responsibility to establish minimum performance standards and acquire FOG approval for all BLM-specific WCF 600-class fire equipment. The NFEP has established required equipment and performance standards for new equipment. These standards reduce excessive procurement costs, maintain common operational functions, and provide a standardized fire fleet. Specifications have been developed for each WCF 600 class of equipment and include standard items. Costs for standard items are covered byWCF when replacing vehicles atthe endof their established lifecycle. Optional equipment, in addition tothe standard are available to order for most classes, however another funding source must be provided bythe state or local unit to purchase these items. All BLM WCF 600-class fire equipment shall meet the applicable Pre-2023 or Post-2023 Vehicle Striping and Graphics Standards (based upon date of procurement) found at https://doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/blm-fa/fire- operations/SitePages/NFEP-Policy-Resources.aspx.
All BLM WCF 600-class fire equipment shall also meet the Equipment Identifier and Location Based Services (LBS) Identifier standards described below: Equipment Identifier: The Equipment Identifier isthe numerical or alpha-numeric graphic identifier that is placed onall fire equipment. The equipment identifier is displayed onthe front, rear, both sides, and top ofthe equipment. Excluding engines and dozers, all equipment identifiers consist ofan alphabetical designator followed bya hyphen, then four-digit number. Engine and dozer equipment identifiers consists of only the four-digit number (see Table 1 below). The Equipment Identifier consists ofthe following: 1. Oneto four-character alphabetical designator that identifies command position or resource type (see Table 1, column 4). 2. Digit 1: District Number – Single digit that identifies the district number within each state. 3. Digit 2: Equipment Type Number – Single digit that identifies the equipment type (see Table 1, column 1). 4. Digit 3and 4: Equipment Number – Two-digit number, 01-99, that is assigned bythe district for each piece of equipment. Table 1: Equipment Type Number Equipment Type Description LBS Identifier (Arizona example) Alphabetical Designator Equipment Identifier (Physical Graphic) 1 Command Class – CH, DV, BC, Supt AZ-XX-X1XX CH/AC/DV/BCCH-X1XX 2IA Crew/Squad/Type 2 Crew AZ-X2XX CC-X2XX 3 Type 3 Engine AZ-X3XX none X3XX 4 Type 4 Engine AZ-X4XX none X4XX 5 Utility/Chase/Fuels/Prevention AZ-X5XX UTL/FT/PTUTL-X5XX PT-X5XX FT-X5XX 6 Type 6 Engine AZ-X6XX none X6XX 7 Helitack Crew Equipment AZ-X7XX HTHT- X7XX 8 Dozer (01-50 Asset Number) AZ-X8XX none X8XX 8 Dozer Tractor (51-99 Asset Number) AZ-X8XX none X8XX 9 Water Tender AZ-X9XX WTWT- X9XX Hotshot Crew, Veteran Crew, Wildland Fire Module Crew Superintendent Truck CREW NAME + SUPT SUPT SUPT Crew Carrier CREW NAME + Aor BAor BAor B Crew Utility Truck CREW NAME + UTL UTL UTL https://doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/blm-fa/fire-operations/SitePages/NFEP-Policy-Resources.aspx Location Based Services (LBS) Identifier (see Table 1, column 3): The Location Based Services (LBS) Identifier will be displayed within the LBS web viewer. The four numerical characters inLBS will match the four-digit Equipment Identifier inall cases. The LBS Identifier consists ofthe following: 1. Two-letter state abbreviation (AK, AZ, CA, CO, ES, FA, ID, NM, NV, MT, OR, UT, WA, orWY) followed bya hyphen. IHC, Veteran, and WFM crews will use Crew Name rather than state abbreviation. 2. Equipment Identifier (see Table 1, column 5) as described above. Only command vehicles also list their respective alphabetical designator for command position.
Example: Changes or Modifications to Vehicle Graphics Requests for changes or modifications to vehicle graphics shall be approved in writing bythe NFEP Program Manager and Branch Chief, Fire Preparedness & Suppression Operations prior to application. • Units may request toadd additional identifiers or logos to fire equipment to meet local agreements or operating procedures. Requests shall be routed tothe Branch Chief, Fire Preparedness & Suppression Operations, via email. • For blended or Service First units, special consideration is allowed for multi-agency equipment purchased bythe BLM. These units will follow the BLM Equipment Identifier standards and may adda multi-agency logo toone or both sides ofthe vehicle. Location-Based Services Program All BLM WCF 600-class vehicles shall be equipped with LBS equipment and adhere tothe requirements ofthe LBS Program described here andin the LBS Identifier standards. The LBS Program combines current Global Positioning System (GPS) technologies with BLM fire and aviation preparedness to provide a situational awareness tool by tracking equipment and providing real-time display ofits location. LBSis incorporated into dispatch and other operating procedures andto enhance situational awareness, decision making, and accountability ofWCF 600-class fire equipment. This program meets the intent ofS.47 - John D. Dingell, Jr. Conservation, Management, and Recreation Act, SEC. 1114. (d) Location Systems for Wildland Firefighters. When anew terminal is received, replacement equipment arrives, oran error with the terminal has been identified, the installation, transfer, or repair must be completed inno more than 15 days. Equipment location canbe viewed inthe Vehicle Tracker Portal (VTP) or Fire Enterprise Geospatial Portal (EGP). VTP access canbe requested foran individual ora group account for dispatch centers. The VTP account request form and additional information about the LBS program canbe found at https://doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/blm- fa/fire-operations/SitePages/Location-Based-Services-(LBS).aspx. Fire Equipment Maintenance and Care Standards BLM fire equipment will be maintained to reflect the highest standards in performance and appearance. All mechanical systems shall be properly maintained and kept in good repair. All interior/exterior equipment components shall be kept clean/waxed, and all items shall be properly secured or locked. Whenever possible mobile fire equipment should adhere tothe following guidelines: • Ensure equipment safety issues and recalls issued by Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) and/or National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) are promptly corrected. • Repair deficient items as soon as issues are identified. • Store equipment in sheltered areas away from environmental elements to prevent damage to critical seals, mechanical components, and the high-visibility finish. • Ensure repairs and maintenance are performed by manufacturer dealerships or authorized repair facilities. • Ensure that any/all eligible items are covered under warranty. • Follow manufacturers owner’s manual guidance for the most severe duty cycles. • Keep thorough documentation ofall maintenance and repair work. Following these guidelines will aide in acquiring approvals for repairs. BLM Engine Equipment Inventory Engines will be stocked with Normal Unit Stocking. Fire Equipment Maintenance Procedure and Record The Fire Equipment Maintenance Procedure and Record (FEMPR) is used to document daily inspections, preventative maintenance, and all repairs for BLM WCF 600-class fire vehicles and any other vehicle used primarily for fire suppression preparedness and operations. The FEMPR shall be periodically archived to maintain a historical
record of preventative maintenance and repairs over the duration ofthe vehicle’s service life. This historical data is beneficial in determining trends, maintenance/repair frequency, and total repair costs. Best practices include maintaining categorical electronic archives ofall FEMPR daily inspections, completed repairs and recalls, fluid sampling results, and other miscellaneous tasks as identified inthe FEMPR. Electronic archives are easily referenced, transferrable with the equipment, and accessible for supporting the vehicle Maintenance Documentation Package required for vehicle repairs. FEMPR templates canbe found at https://doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/blm-fa/fire- operations/SitePages/FEMPR.aspx. Apparatus safety and operational inspections will be performed atthe heavy/severe service intervals recommended bythe manufacturer andon a daily, post-fire, and annual basis as required. For engines and water tenders, all annual inspections will include a pump gallons per minute (GPM) test to ensure the pump/plumbing system is operating ator above the manufacturer’s minimum rating for the pump. These requirements are detailed inthe respective vehicle FEMPR. BLM Engine Use Reporting Daily engine use statistics and accomplishments shall be reported byall BLM engines and water tenders utilizing the existing Engine Use Reporting (EUR) spreadsheet, directions, and EUR SharePoint. The EUR should be printed prior tothe beginning of each month and any equipment use shall be recorded onthe printout. Once the Fire Use (FUSE) application is finalized, it will replace the EUR asthe primary reporting method and existing paper records canbe transferred tothe application. FUSE reporting canbe accomplished daily as part ofthe FEMPR process, oras practicable. The FUSE application should be supplemented with the existing Engine Use Report (EUR). The EUR should still be printed and completed when unable to update FUSE dueto a lack of network connectivity and then transferred into FUSE as soon as possible. More information about Engine Use Reporting and the FUSE application canbe found at https://doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/blm-fa/fire-operations/SitePages/Engine-Use-Reporting-(EUR).aspx. Fluid Sampling All BLM WCF 600-class vehicles with a GVWR greater than 14,000 lbs. are required to periodically collect samples of critical vehicle fluids and submit them tothe BLM contracted fluid sampling laboratory. Fluid sampling requirements are identified inthe respective vehicle FEMPR and can be found at https://doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/blm-fa/fire-operations/SitePages/NFEP-Policy-Resources.aspx. The NFEP recommends carrying an extra fluid sampling kitin a sterile container with each vehicle, inthe event that fluid sampling must be completed away from the home unit. Fire Equipment Repairs Services/repairs toBLM WCF 600-class fire equipment shall follow the processes outlined inthe WCF 600-Class Fire Fleet Repair Flowchart orBLM H-1525-1 Fleet Management Handbook. Whenever possible, repairs should be completed through a facility approved bythe Final Vehicle Manufacturer, orOEM service center for the vehicle chassis. BLM Tire Inspection and Replacement All BLM mobile fire equipment (fire vehicles, WCF equipment, UTV trailers, etc.) shall follow the repair or replacement standards outlined inthe respective vehicle FEMPR, the Tire Replacement Standards found atthe NFEP website, orthe BLMH-1525-1 Fleet Management Handbook. Improvement and Deficiency Reporting System The NFEP DOI Improvement and Deficiency Reporting System (IDRS) is used to collect deficiency reports, improvement suggestions, and modification proposals for all BLM mobile fire equipment. The reporting system enables the NFEP to build a comprehensive database to document problems, identify trends, and establish priorities for development and modification ofnew and existing equipment. BLM districts/field offices are required to submit timely and detailed deficiency reports for problems encountered with mobile fire equipment. Reports will also be submitted for suggestions for improvements. The NFEP will verify receipt ofall reports and will follow-up with the submitting district/field office to correct the deficiency or work to incorporate the improvement suggestion. Equipment Modification/Retrofitting Requests Modification proposals must also be submitted through the NFEP DOI Improvement and Deficiency Reporting System (IDRS) or applicable FOG subcommittee for consideration and approved bythe NFEP prior to implementing changes. BLM units are responsible for maintaining documentation of approvals. Unauthorized
modifications and retrofits have the potential to negatively impact equipment quality and safety and void manufacturer warranties. In such cases, the financial burden of corrective action will bethe responsibility ofthe home state/unit preparedness funding. Property Transfer/Replacement Surplus and early replacement fire vehicles maybe transferred to another unit for continued service with the approval ofthe SFMO(s), the BLM Fleet Manager, and the WCF Manager. In these instances, the vehicle remains inthe same class and the FOR and use rates will continue tobe charged tothe unit acquiring the vehicle. Units may dispose of fire vehicles prior tothe normal replacement date. In these instances, no future replacement is automatically provided and there isno accrued credit for the FOR collected on that unit prior to disposal. Units acquiring this type of equipment continue payment ofthe FOR and use rates. Mobile fire equipment transfers require approvals onthe BLM Fire and Aviation Fire Fleet Transfer Notification and 1520-104v, Transfer of Asset-Fleet. Send transfer documents (https://doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/blm-fa/fire- operations/SitePages/NFEP-Policy-Resources.aspx) tothe responsible NFEP Production Manager. Conversions Offices requesting to convert replacement fire equipment toa different class of equipment must have documentation showing: • Proposed changes meet current and future preparedness requirements identified in land/resource management plans and fire management plans. • Proposed changes result inan overall cost savings tothe Government or increased production rates offset additional costs. Any additional cost will bethe responsibility ofthe requesting unit. Conversions require completion and approval onthe following forms: ○ BLM Fire and Aviation WCF 600 Series Request form ○ Form 1520-104v, Transfer of Asset-Fleet ○ Form 1520-58, Vehicle or Equipment Justification and Approval ○ Form 1510-18V, Obligating Funds for Acquisition of Working Capital Fund Assets (if additional funding is necessary). Rural Fire Readiness Program The Rural Fire Readiness (RFR) equipment transfer program is intended to provide a streamlined process for BLM to transfer no longer needed firefighting equipment to local cooperators in strategic areas that benefit BLM’s wildland fire mission. Local cooperators area critical component inthe “All Hands, All Lands” fire management approach. In many instances, local cooperators arein the right place atthe right time when a fire starts, but they donot have the right safety and tactical equipment tobe successful in their early suppression efforts, andin many cases, preventing them from safely and effectively integrating with State and Federal firefighting resources. The goal ofthe BLM RFR equipment transfer program isto improve the capability and capacity ofour collaborative firefighting efforts with our local partners. The FAD will work with the NOC to ensure fire equipment is correctly transferred. This process includes ensuring the estimated salvage value and title transfer fees are paid tothe BLM WCF prior to transferring equipment to cooperators. The BLM is authorized to undertake the following actions: • Transfer the title ofBLM firefighting equipment which isno longer needed to carry out the functions ofthe wildland fire management program toone ofthe following organizations: ○ Rangeland Fire Protection Associations (RFPA). ○ Local volunteer fire departments. ○ Cooperators protecting remote communities under cooperative response agreements and who play a substantial role inthe suppression of wildland fires on Department ofthe Interior (DOI) and other federal lands. • Bypass the GSAXcess process for firefighting equipment and perform direct transfers to RFPAs and similarly eligible local firefighting cooperators as specified inthe RFR Equipment Transfer Program Guidelines. Please note the following exception: Working Capital Fund (WCF) equipment must be processed asa negotiated sale coordinated bythe controlling WCF office. Policy, information, and instructions about RFR can be found at: https://doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/blm-fa/fire- operations/SitePages/BLM-Rural-Fire-Readiness-(RFR).aspx. BLM Implementation ofthe Department ofthe Interior Authorization for Use of Government Passenger Carrier(s) for Home-to-Work Transportation The BLM recognizes the need for domiciling fire vehicles for specific positions during fire season to provide for more immediate response to wildfires during off-duty hours and has been granted this authority byDOI.
• Only those positions authorized and preidentified within the DOI memorandum will have the authority to domicile designated Government vehicles. • This authority is intended only for individuals in first response fire leadership roles who may be responding to initial attack fires directly from their home after hours. • Government vehicles are used solely for official business and domiciled only during core fire season months when there isa heightened level of current or expected fire activity. • Authorized positions will be recertified every two years and may be revised at that time. • Units are responsible for maintaining documentation of home-to-work useof Government vehicles. This documentation will be reviewed during annual fire and aviation preparedness reviews. A standard tracking form has been developed and may be used for this purpose. Lights-and-Sirens Response Responding toBLM wildfire incidents normally does not warrant the use of emergency lights and sirens to safely and effectively perform the BLM mission. However, there maybe rare or extenuating circumstances when limited useof lights and sirens are appropriate and necessary dueto an immediate threat to life. Those BLM state organizations that determine a lights-and-sirens response is necessary to meet mission requirements must develop an operating plan that is signed and approved bythe state director and forwarded tothe Fire Operations Division Chief (FA-300). The operating plan must ensure the following: 1. All vehicles (command, engines, etc.) will be properly marked, equipped, and operated in accordance with State statutes, codes, permits, and BLM unit requirements. 2. Drivers will complete training inthe proper useof lights-and-sirens response in accordance with National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 1451 and 1002 standards, as well asany State requirements. 3. Engine drivers responding with lights and sirens will be minimally qualified as engine operator with a qualified engine boss inthe engine; otherwise, driver must be engine boss qualified. Drivers ofany other mobile fire equipment responding with lights and sirens shall be minimally qualified as single resource boss. 4. Lights and sirens will meet NFPA and State code requirements. 5. Operators will follow posted speed limits atall times, regardless of response type. 6. Operators will stop or reduce speed as circumstances dictate prior to proceeding through all intersections. 7. Operators will only use traffic light changing mechanisms (e.g., Opticons) under formal written agreement with State and local governments and only when necessary to create safe right-of-way through urban high-traffic areas. 8. Drivers shall only respond with lights and sirens inthe State or States authorized by their local unit. Foam Use BLM engines are designed with integrated foam tanks and automatic foam proportioners as standard equipment. When properly used along with various foam nozzles, foam use increases the effectiveness of water. This equipment should be used to apply approved foam concentrate along with water delivery during fire suppression. Special exceptions should be made where accidental spillage or overspray ofthe chemical could be harmful tothe aquatic ecosystem or where other identified resource concerns are identified. BLM Firefighters Introduction Firefighters operate within ICS, which isa component ofthe National Incident Management System (NIMS). Within ICS, firefighters are either assigned as single resource overhead (individuals assigned to specific supervisory or functional positions) oras members ofan organized unit. The individuals within these units are trained to provide different levels and types of tactical, logistical, and managerial capability. These units include: • Hand Crews – Vehicle-mobile firefighters that specialize inthe useof hand tools, chainsaws, portable pumps, and ignition devices for tactical operations. Hand crew types include interagency hotshot crews (IHCs), type 2 initial attack crews, type 2 crews, and fire suppression modules. • Engine Crews – Engine-mobile firefighters that specialize inthe useof engines for tactical operations. • Helitack – Helicopter mobile firefighters that specialize inthe useof helicopters for tactical and logistical operations. • Smokejumpers – Fixed-wing-aircraft-and-parachute-mobile firefighters that specialize inthe use hand tools, chainsaws, and ignition devices for tactical operations. Addition or establishment ofthe following assets requires approval from the Assistant Director (FA):
• Firefighting engines and water tenders (refer to existing guidance regarding acquisition ofWCF equipment in this chapter); • Firefighting dozers and dozer modules (refer to existing guidance regarding acquisition ofWCF equipment in this chapter); • Type 1, type 2 initial attack, and type 2 hand crews; • Fire suppression modules funded asa preparedness resource (modules assembled for individual fire assignment are exempted); • Wildland fire modules; • Exclusive-use helitack crews; and • Fuels management modules/crews. BLM Firefighter Priority for Use • Initial attack on lands for which the BLM has suppression responsibility. • Other fire suppression/management assignments onBLM-managed lands. • Other fire suppression/management assignments on other agency lands. • All-hazards (ESF #4). Mobilization ofBLM Firefighters BLM firefighters are mobilized to perform the following functions: • Suppress fires and manage wildland fire incidents; • Improve BLM initial attack capability; • Maximize the utilization of limited BLM fire operational assets; • Provide additional fire management capability in high-tempo periods; • Provide experience and developmental opportunities toBLM firefighters; • Perform fire management project work or assignments; or • Perform other project work or assignments. There are six funding mechanisms for mobilizing BLM firefighters: • Preparedness funding • Suppression funding • Short-term severity (state-/regional-level severity) funding • National-level severity funding • National preposition funding • State discretionary preposition funding Preparedness Funding Preparedness funding maybe used to mobilize resources for normal preparedness activities such as: • Movement of resources within a unit not associated with fire activity; • Detailing firefighters to fill vacant positions; • Project work or normal preparedness activities; and/or • Training. Fire managers have the authority to expend preparedness funding for preparedness activities. Mobilization ofnon- BLM Federal resources with BLM preparedness funding requires a reimbursable agreement. Suppression Funding Suppression funding is used to mobilize resources to wildland fire incidents. BLM firefighters are mobilized directly to incidents using established methods (resource orders, initial attack agreements, dispatch plans, response plans, etc.). Short-Term Severity, State-Level Short-term severity funding maybe used to mobilize resources for state/regional short-term severity needs that are expected to last less than one week, such as: • Wind events; • Dry cold front passage; • Lightning events; and/or • Unexpected events, such asoff-road rallies or recreational gatherings. Each state director and the division chiefs for operations and aviation have the delegated authority to expend “short- term” severity funds per fiscal year. This discretionary severity authorization canbe expended for appropriate
severity activities without approval from FA. States will establish a process for requesting, approving, and tracking short-term severity funds. National-level Severity Funding National-level severity funding is used to mobilize resources to areas where: • Preparedness plans indicate the need for additional preparedness/ suppression resources; • Anticipated fire activity will exceed the capabilities of local resources; • Fire season has either started earlier or lasted longer than identified inthe Fire Danger Operating Plan; • An abnormal increase in fire potential or fire danger (e.g., high fine fuel loading, fuel dryness) not planned forin existing preparedness plans; and/or • There isa need to mitigate threats to values identified in land and resource management plans (L/RMP) with Assistant Director (FA) concurrence. In addition tothe above criteria, the Assistant Director (FA) may consider other factors when approving requests for national severity. Guidance for requesting and utilizing national-level severity funding is found in chapter 10and onthe BLM Fire Operations website. The state director will submit requests, consolidated by state and coordinated with FA, through official memorandum tothe Assistant Director (FA). An electronic copy should also bee-mailed to “BLM_FA_Severity@blm.gov.” Severity funding requests will be accepted and approved fora maximum of30 days, regardless ofthe length ofthe authorization. Useof severity funding must be terminated when abnormal conditions no longer exist. Ifthe fire severity situation extends beyond the30-day authorization, the state must prepare anew severity request. TheFA will issue an approval memorandum listing authorized resources along with a cost string code for each state and field office touse for all resources. All resources authorized through this process will be counted inthe state’s severity authorization limit, including extension of exclusive-use aircraft contracts. In order to support the BLM national aviation strategy, which includes prioritized allocation based on need, air resource mobility, and cost containment, a state maybe directed to release anair resource to another state. All charges related to releasing anair resource will be covered byFAD orthe receiving state. National Preposition Funding National preposition funding is used to mobilize resources to areas with anticipated fire activity when other funding isnot available. Units may request national preposition funding from FADto acquire supplemental fire operations assets to increase initial attack capability when BLM units donot: • Have available preparedness funding; • Have available short-term severity funding; or • Meet the criteria for use of national severity funding. Approved national preposition funding maybe used only for travel and per diem costs for the duration ofthe assignment and overtime labor costs associated with the original preposition move. Each state director has been delegated the authority to expend national preposition funding within an allocation limit established annually through issuance ofan instruction memorandum. National preposition cost codes will be provided upon authorization from FA. National Preposition Request Process • Unit FMO identifies need and notifies state FOG representative. FOG representative informs SFMO. • FOG representative coordinates with unit FMOto verify need and determine asset types, numbers, and projected preposition location. • Requesting FOG representative queries FOG and identifies available assets. • Requesting and sending FOG representatives jointly complete the BLM Preposition Request Form. • Requesting FOG representative will submit the request electronically viae-mail to “BLM_FA_Prepositioning@blm.gov” to acquire Fire Operations Division (FA-300) approval. If aviation assets are requested, FA-300 will coordinate with the National Aviation Office (FA-500) and secure FA-500 approval. • FA-300 will notify the requesting and sending FOG representatives viae-mail when the request is approved/disapproved. • After securing FA-300/500 approval, the requesting FOG representative places name request order(s) for specified assets through normal coordination system channels. • Receiving FOG representative will assign the responding BLM assets toa temporary host unit.
• Responding assets, sending/receiving FOG representatives, and the temporary host unit will negotiate length of assignment and crew rotation, and ensure that prepositioned personnel meet work/rest requirements. BLM preposition funding request information canbe found atthe BLM Fire Operations website. State Discretionary Preposition Funding Each state director has the delegated authority to expend preposition funding for prepositioning activities in amounts determined bythe BLM FLT. This discretionary preposition funding authorization canbe expended for appropriate preposition activities (according tothe criteria established for national preposition funding) without approval from the Assistant Director (FA). Each state will establish a process to document requests and approvals and maintain information ina file. BLM Fire Training and Workforce Development BLM Fire Training and Workforce Development Program The BLM National Fire Training and Workforce Development Program is located at NIFC and works for the Chief, Branch of Preparedness and Suppression Operations (FA-320). The program develops the wildland firefighting workforce through qualification standards, training standards, and workforce development programs in support ofBLM fire management. BLM Standards for Fire Training and Workforce Development The BLM Fire Training and Workforce Development Program, in coordination with the FOG and state training officers, is responsible for publishing the BLM Standards for Fire Training and Workforce Development. The BLM Standards for Fire Training and Workforce Development provides fire and aviation training, qualifications, and workforce development program management direction. Hiring and Qualification Requirements Personnel hired bythe BLM must meet requirements established inthe position description. Ifthe position description requires ICS qualifications, only qualifications and minimum requirements specified inthe NWCG Standards for Wildland Fire Position Qualifications, PMS 310-1, will be applied as selective factors and/or screen- out questions. To avoid reducing candidate pools, BLM-specific requirements that are supplemental tothe PMS 310-1may notbe used as selective placement factors/screen-out questions. Supplemental BLM-specific training or qualification requirements may only be used as selective factors and/or screen-out questions when requested and justified bythe selecting official and approved byHR. Impacts tothe candidate pool must be addressed inthe justification. As with all other BLM- orDOI-specific training/experience requirements (e.g., purchase card training) that newly hired employees from other agencies may not have, the supervisor and Incident Qualifications and Certification System (IQCS) certifying official are responsible for reconciling that employee’s training and IQCS Responder Master Record after the employee has entered on duty. This maybe accomplished by providing additional training/experience orby manually awarding competencies asper established IQCS protocol. Experience requirements for positions in Alaska, Oregon and California (O&C) districts, FA, and other fire management positions in units and state/regional offices will be established as vacancies occur but will be commensurate with the position’s scope of responsibilities. The developmental training to fully achieve competencies should be addressed inan individual development plan (IDP) within a defined timeframe. BLM Firefighters General Non-Fire Training Requirements Administratively Determined and Emergency Firefighters Training Required Initial Requirement/ Frequency Delivery Method/ Responsible Party Defensive Driving (if operating a Government vehicle, or rental/leased vehicle for official purposes) • Prior to operating motor vehicle for official purposes • Once every three years • GSA Training or instructor-led • Unit safety manager First Aid/ Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) • Upon initial employment • Every 2 years orper certifying authority • At least two persons per crew (GSor AD) shall be current and certified. • Instructor-led • Unit safety manager
Training Required Initial Requirement/ Frequency Delivery Method/ Responsible Party Fuel Transport Hazardous Materials Training (required for all employees who transport, prepare for transport, load, unload, handle, orare responsible for the safety of hazardous materials that are being transported) • Upon initial employment anda refresher every 3 years thereafter • https://www.fs.usda.gov/t- d/fueltran/training/index.htm Agency Permanent, Career Seasonal, and Temporary Firefighters Training Required Initial Requirement/ Frequency Delivery Method/ Responsible Party Bloodborne Pathogens • Once: Awareness level for employees notat increased risk (e.g., non-fireline support personnel) • Annually: For employees at increased risk dueto assigned duties (e.g., IHC, helitack, SMKJ, engine crew) • Instructor-led • Unit safety manager Defensive Driving (if operating a Government vehicle, or rental/leased vehicle for official purposes) • Prior to operating a motor vehicle for official purposes • Once every three years • DOI Talent or instructor-led • Unit safety manager EEO • Annually • Instructor-led, DOI Talent, oras determined byEEO manager • EEO – EEO manager First Aid/ Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) • Upon initial employment • Every 2 years orper certifying authority • Instructor-led • Unit safety manager HAZWOPER – Field Awareness (section 6) • Upon initial employment • Annually • Instructor-led • Unit safety manager • National Training Center (https://www.ntc.blm.gov/krc/viewr esource.php?courseID=1086&progr amAreaId=118) BLM Hazard Communications (HAZCOM) – Globally Harmonized System (GHS) • Upon initial employment • DOI Talent (https://doitalent.ibc.doi.gov/enrol/index.php?id=18630) • Unit safety manager, unit hazardous materials coordinator Hearing Conservation • Upon initial employment • Annually • Unit safety manager orDOI Talent Hearing Conservation (BLM) (Self- Paced) https://doitalent.ibc.doi.gov/enrol/inde x.php?id=20192 Safety Orientation • Once • Instructor-led • Supervisor Fuel Transport Hazardous Materials Training (required for all employees who transport, prepare for transport, load, unload, handle, orare responsible for the safety of hazardous materials that are being transported) • Upon initial employment anda refresher every 3 years thereafter • https://www.fs.usda.gov/t- d/fueltran/training/index.htm
Driver Training for Regular Drivers of Fire Equipment All regular drivers of specialized vehicles (e.g., engines, water tenders, crew carriers, fuel tenders, helicopter support vehicles) must complete BL-300, Fire Vehicle Driver Orientation (initially) andRT-301, Fire Vehicle Driver Refresher Training (annually). Course materials are available via the BLM Fire Training website. For the purposes of this policy, a regular driver is defined asan employee whose duties include driving fire equipment ona regular basis. This may include highway, off-road, city, mobile attack, and extreme terrain driving. BLM Firefighter Mandatory Physical Fitness Standards The NWCG Standards for Wildland Fire Position Qualifications, PMS 310-1, establishes physical fitness standards for NWCG-sanctioned firefighters. These standards are assessed using the work capacity test (WCT). Prior to attempting the WCT, all permanent, career-seasonal, temporary, andAD/EFF employees who participate in wildland fire activities requiring a fitness level of arduous must participate inthe DOI Medical Qualification Standards Program. Employees serving in wildland fire positions that require a fitness rating of arduous asa condition of employment are required to perform physical fitness conditioning for one hour of duty time each workday while inpay status. Special exceptions such as being assigned toan incident, travel status, injuries, details, etc., maybe granted. BLM employees funded by fire preparedness and/or fuels whodo not require a fitness rating of arduous asa condition of employment butdo maintain a fire qualification with an arduous rating maybe authorized one hour of daily duty time for physical fitness conditioning. Participation will be negotiated with the employee’s supervisor. Employees serving in positions that require a fitness rating of moderate or light maybe authorized upto three hours per week. Information onthe WCT and the DOI MSPis located in chapter 13. BLM National Fire Operations Fitness Challenge The BLM Fire Operations Fitness Challenge (https://www.nifc.gov/about-us/our-partners/blm/training/fitness- challenge) encourages and recognizes achievement in physical fitness byBLM firefighters. The fitness challenge provides a common system by which BLM firefighters can measure current fitness, establish fitness goals, track fitness improvement, and receive recognition for their efforts. The fitness challenge is voluntary, but BLM firefighters are strongly encouraged to participate. The BLM Fire Operations Fitness Challenge was updated in 2022. BLM State offices and BLM districts will recognize achievement inthe BLM Fire Operations Fitness Challenge. Nationally, FA will annually recognize individuals that demonstrate the most improvement and top over-all scores byage group and other factors. Interagency Fire Program Management Standards The BLM follows the Interagency Fire Program Management Qualifications Standards and Guide, January 2000. The guide does the following: • Establishes minimum qualifications standards for11 key fire management positions. These standards include 1) basic requirements, 2) specialized experience requirements, 3) NWCG incident management qualifications, and4) additional required training. • Provides a “complexity rating for program management” table, which is used to determine overall complexity ofthe unit-level fire program. This is used because qualification standards for some ofthe 11 identified positions are tied to fire program complexity. The supplemental qualification standard for professional GS-0401 fire management specialist positions, approved bythe Office of Personnel Management, is also included inthe guide. State- and unit-level fire managers should consult HR officials and apply Interagency Fire Program Management (IFPM) standards as appropriate. BLM Hand Crews BLM Hand Crew Standards (All Crew Types) • Language – Crew boss (CRWB) and firefighter type 1 (FFT1); must be able to read and interpret the language ofthe crew as well as English • Flight weight – 5,300 pounds • Personal gear – Sufficient for14-day assignments • Physical fitness – Arduous; all positions • Required equipment and PPE – Fully equipped as specified inthe Interagency Standards for Fire and Fire Aviation Operations
BLM Hand Crew Standards by Type Crew Details Type 1IHC Type 2 Initial Attack Type 2 Fire Suppression Module Crew Size Minimum 20 Maximum 25 (See “Crew Standards for National Mobilization”) Minimum 18 Maximum 20 Minimum 18 Maximum 20 Minimum 5 Maximum 10 Leadership Qualifications 1 Superintendent 1 Asst. Superintendent 3 Squad leaders 2 Senior FFTs (FFT1) or1 Superintendent 2 Asst. Superintendent 2 Squad Leaders 2 Senior FFTs (FFT1) 1 CRWB 3 ICT5 1 CRWB 3 FFT1 1 single resource boss (SRB)/ICT5 2 FFT1 Fireline Capability Initial attack – Canbe broken up into squads, fireline construction, complex firing operations (backfire) Initial attack – Canbe broken up into squads, fireline construction Initial attack – Fireline construction Operates asa single module with type 5 command capability Language Requirement All senior leadership, including squad leaders and higher, must be able to read and interpret the language ofthe crew as well as English Same as type 1 Same as type 1 Same as type 1 Crew Experience 80% ofthe crewmembers must have at least 1 season experience in fire suppression 60% ofthe crewmembers must have at least 1 season experience in fire suppression 20% ofthe crewmembers must have at least 1 season experience in fire suppression Agency only Full-Time Organized Crew Yes (work and train asa unit 40 hours per week) NoNo No Crew Utilization National shared resource Local unit control Local unit control Local unit control Communication 8 programmable handheld radios 1 programmable mobile radio in each truck 4 programmable handheld radios 4 programmable handheld radios 2 programmable handheld radios Sawyers 4 faller type 2 (FAL2), 50% of crew FAL3 1 FAL2, 2 FAL3 None 2 FAL3 Training As required bythe Standards for Interagency Hotshot Crew Operations or agency policy prior to assignment Basic firefighter training or once qualified, 4 hours annual fireline refresher training prior to assignment Basic firefighter training or once qualified, 4 hours annual fireline refresher training prior to assignment Basic firefighter training or once qualified, 4 hours annual fireline refresher training prior to assignment Logistics Squad-level agency purchasing authority Crew-level agency purchasing authority recommended No purchasing authority Self-sufficient for48 hours; purchasing authority recommended Maximum Weight 5,300 lbs. 5,300 lbs. 5,300 lbs. N/A Dispatch Availability Available nationally Available nationally Variable Variable Production Factor 1.0 .8 .8 Variable Transportation Own transportation Need transportation Need transportation Own transportation Tools and Equipment Fully equipped Not equipped Not equipped Variable
Crew Details Type 1IHC Type 2 Initial Attack Type 2 Fire Suppression Module Personal Gear Arrives with crew first aid kit, personal first aid kit, headlamp, 1-quart canteen, web gear, sleeping bag Same as type 1 Same as type 1 Same as type 1PPE All standard designated fireline PPE Same as type 1 Same as type 1 Same as type 1 Certification Must be annually certified bythe local host unit AADM or designee prior to being made available for assignment N/AN/AN/ABLM Interagency Hotshot Crews BLM IHCs will meet all requirements found inthe Standards for Interagency Hotshot Crew Operations (SIHCO) and the Interagency Standards for Fire and Fire Aviation Operations while providing a safe, professional, mobile, and highly skilled hand crew for all phases of fire management and incident operations. BLM Interagency Hotshot Crew Locations State Crew Location AK Chena Fairbanks Midnight SunAZ Aravaipa Veteran Sierra Vista CA Diamond Mountain Susanville Kern Valley Bakersfield CO Craig Craig ID Snake River Pocatello MS Jackson Jackson NV Silver State Carson City Ruby Mountain Elko OR Vale Vale Lakeview Veteran Klamath Falls UT Bonneville Salt Lake City Annual Interagency Hotshot Crew Mobilization Requirements Prior to becoming available for mobilization, each BLM IHC will complete the BLM Hotshot Crew Preparedness Review Checklist #16and the Annual IHC Mobilization Checklist (SIHCO, appendix C). The IHC superintendent, supervising fire management officer, and supervising AADM will complete both checklists and send tothe SFMO for concurrence. Upon concurrence, the SFMO will notify the appropriate Geographic Area Coordination Center (GACC) and the Chief, Branch of Preparedness and Suppression Operations (FA-320) of crew status and provide copies ofthe BLM Hotshot Crew Preparedness Review Checklist #16and the Annual IHC Mobilization Checklist (SIHCO, appendix C) to each. Establishing or Converting BLM Interagency Hotshot Crews BLM state directors must request approval from the Assistant Director (FA) prior to beginning the process to establish anew BLM IHC orto convert a current type 2or type 2 initial attack crew toan IHC. Upon approval from Assistant Director (FA), BLM states will follow the crew certification process as outlined inthe SIHCO, chapter 5. The IHC certification process will be coordinated with FA-300. BLM Interagency Hotshot Crew Decertification and Recertification Changes to crew qualifications and capabilities should be closely examined bythe superintendent to ensure that all requirements contained inthe SIHCO are met. Any BLM IHC that is unable to meet the minimum requirements will be placed in type 2 initial attack status until the requirements canbe met. Exceptions tothe requirements must be requested bythe state fire management officer (for IHCs based inthe eastern and southern geographic areas, the request must be made bythe State Director, Eastern States), and may be granted ona case-by-case basis bythe Fire Operations Division Chief (FA-300).
Short-term inability to meet the requirements may not necessarily require recertification but may require completion ofthe Annual IHC Mobilization Checklist (SIHCO, appendix C) and concurrence from the Chief, Branch of Preparedness and Suppression Operations (FA-320) before regaining IHC status. Longer-term or more significant failures to meet the requirements may require the full recertification process as stated inthe SIHCO, with oversight from the Fire Operations Division. BLM Interagency Hotshot Crew Size Standard crew size is20-22 with a maximum of25. For national mobilization, BLM IHCs will have a minimum of18 personnel. BLM IHC superintendents will obtain prior approval from the respective GACC when the assignment requires fixed-wing transport ofan IHC with more than 20 personnel. BLM Interagency Hotshot Crew Training and Qualification Requirements Position NWCG Qualification Fire Training Firefighter FFT2 ICS-100 Introduction tothe ICSIS-700An Introduction tothe NIMS S-130 Firefighter Training S-190 Introduction to Wildland Fire Behavior L-180 Human Factors inthe Wildland Fire Service Senior Firefighter FFT1 All the above plus: S-211 Portable Pumps and Water UseS-212 Wildland Fire Chainsaws S-131 Firefighter Type 1S-270 Basic Air Operations Squad Leader • ICT5 • CRWB All the above plus: IS-800 National Response Framework (NRF): An Introduction ICS-200 Basic ICS for Initial Response S-215 Fire Operations inthe WUIS-230 Crew Boss (Single Resource) S-219 Firing Operations S-260 Interagency Incident Business Management S-290 Intermediate Wildland Fire Behavior L-280 Followership to Leadership Assistant Superintendent or Captain • Strike team leader crew (STCR) or task force leader (TFLD) • CRWB • ICT4 All the above plus: ICS-300 Intermediate ICSS-200 Initial Attack Incident Commander (IC) S-330 Task Force/Strike Team Leader S-390 Introduction to Wildland Fire Behavior Calculations L-380 Fireline Leadership M-410 Facilitative Instructor or equivalent Superintendent • TFLD • ICT4 • Firing boss (FIRB) All the above Interagency Hotshot Crew Position Descriptions and Selective Placement Factors Guidance for utilization ofDOI standard position descriptions and selective placement factors when recruiting and filling positions onBLM IHCs canbe found at https://doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/blm-fa/SitePages/BLM-0456- Series-Toolbox.aspx. The DOI standard position descriptions (SPDs) and the National Wildfire Coordinating Group (NWCG) qualification requirements will be utilized when recruiting and filling positions on IHCs. Human resources specialists should first consult FMOs for questions on NWCG qualifications orthe Interagency Fire Program Management (IFPM) position standards. Hand Crew (Non-Interagency Hotshot Crew) Position Descriptions and Selective Placement Factors Guidance for utilization ofDOI standard position descriptions and selective placement factors when recruiting and filling positions onBLM hand crews (non-interagency hotshot crews) canbe found at https://doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/blm-fa/SitePages/BLM-0456-Series-Toolbox.aspx. The DOI standard position descriptions (SPDs) and the National Wildfire Coordinating Group (NWCG) qualification requirements will be utilized when recruiting and filling positions on hand crews (non-interagency hotshot crews). Human resources
specialists should first consult FMOs for questions on NWCG qualifications orthe Interagency Fire Program Management (IFPM) position standards. BLM Veteran Crews BLM veteran crews are comprised primarily of veterans from the United States Armed Forces. Each veteran crew trains and works asa single unit and mobilizes fully equipped with transportation. The diverse make-upof veteran crewmembers provides a high level of professionalism, leadership, and skills that are transferable tothe wildland fire environment. Standards for Veteran Crew Operations is available at https://www.nifc.gov/about-us/our- partners/blm/blm-crews. BLM Veteran Crew Types and Locations State Crew Type Location AZ Aravaipa Veteran IHC Sierra Vista CA Folsom Lake Type 2 initial attack Placerville MT Billings Veteran Type 2 initial attack Billings NV Vegas Valley Type 2 initial attack Las Vegas OR Lakeview Veteran IHC Klamath Falls Medford Type 2 initial attack Medford WA Spokane Fire suppression module Spokane WY Devil’s Canyon Type 2 initial attack Worland BLM Fire Suppression Modules Fire suppression modules are comprised of5-10 firefighters and are used primarily for wildfire suppression, fuels reduction, and other fire management duties. Fire suppression modules can perform self-contained, initial attack suppression operations and can generally provide incident management capability atthe type 5 complexity level. BLM Fire Suppression Module Mobilization Fire suppression modules will be statused, tracked, and mobilized inthe Interagency Resource Ordering Capability (IROC) system using the resource identifier “Module, Suppression.” BLM Wildland Fire Modules BLM Wildland Fire Module Position Descriptions and Selective Placement Factors Guidance for utilization ofDOI standard position descriptions and selective placement factors when recruiting and filling positions onBLM wildland fire modules canbe found at https://doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/blm- fa/SitePages/BLM-0456-Series-Toolbox.aspx . The DOI standard position descriptions (SPDs) and the National Wildfire Coordinating Group (NWCG) qualification requirements will be utilized when recruiting and filling positions onBLM wildland fire modules. Human resources specialists should first consult FMOs for questions on NWCG qualifications orthe Interagency Fire Program Management (IFPM) position standards. Refer to chapter 13for additional wildland fire module information. BLM Engines Engines carry twoto six firefighters and are used primarily for wildfire suppression, fuels reduction, and other fire management duties. Engine personnel can perform self-contained, initial attack suppression operations and can generally provide single resource incident management capability upto the type 4 complexity level. BLM Engine Ordering • Engine personnel will status through the local dispatch center in accordance with local policy and procedures. • Availability of engines for off-unit assignments rests with local unit fire management. • Units needing engines from another state for support will contact their state operations lead with a request. • The state operations lead will contact the Fire Operations Division (FA-300) or other state office operations leads with the request. BLM Engine Typing Engines are typed according to interagency standards as established by NWCG. See chapter 14for engine typing standards.
BLM Engine Minimum Staffing Requirements All engines will meet these minimum staffing requirements on every incident response: • Minimum staffing for type 6 engines istwo personnel: one single resource boss-engine (ENGB) and one firefighter type 2 (FFT2). • Minimum staffing for type 3, 4, and5 engines is three personnel: one ENGB and two FFT2s. When staffing an engine with an employee from another agency ona short-term basis (detail, severity assignment, etc.), the qualification standards of that agency will be accepted. These qualifications must meet PMS 310-1 requirements for the position. BLM Engine Training and Qualification Requirements BLM has established additional training and qualification requirements for engine operator (ENOP) and engine boss (ENGB). These additional requirements areas follows: Fireline Position Required Qualifications and Training Firefighter Type 2ICS-100 Introduction tothe ICSIS-700An Introduction tothe NIMS L-180 Human Factors inthe Wildland Fire Service S-130 Firefighter Training S-190 Introduction to Wildland Fire Behavior Engine Operator1 Qualified as FFT1 N9018 BLM Engine Operator Course L-280 Followership to Leadership S-131 Firefighter Type 1S-211 Portable Pumps and Water UseS-212 Wildland Fire Chainsaws S-290 Intermediate Wildland Fire Behavior RT-301 BLM Fire Vehicle Driver Refresher - Annually Engine Boss Qualified as ENOP and ICT5 ICS-200 Basic ICS for Initial Response S-215 Fire Operations inthe Wildland/Urban Interface S-230 Crew Boss (Single Resource) S-290 Intermediate Wildland Fire Behavior 1The BLM utilizes the ENOP fireline qualification to provide additional expertise in engine maintenance, pump operations, and vehicle operation. ENOP is required prior to qualification asa BLM ENGB. Engine Crew Position Descriptions and Selective Placement Factors Guidance for utilization ofDOI standard position descriptions and selective placement factors when recruiting and filling positions onBLM engine crews canbe found at https://doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/blm-fa/SitePages/BLM- 0456-Series-Toolbox.aspx. The DOI standard position descriptions (SPDs) and the National Wildfire Coordinating Group (NWCG) qualification requirements will be utilized when recruiting and filling positions on engine crews. Human resources specialists should first consult FMOs for questions on NWCG qualifications orthe Interagency Fire Program Management (IFPM) position standards. BLM Engine Driver Requirements For engines greater than 26,000 gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR), the driver ofthe engine is required to possess a commercial driver’s license (CDL). Refer to chapter 7for more information. WCF class-668 vehicle drivers are required to complete WCF Class-668 Driver and Maintenance Training (once). WCF Class-668 Driver and Maintenance Training maybe conducted atthe unit/zone/state level utilizing qualified and experienced class-668 operators. NFEP staff are available as unit instructors; the hosting unit is responsible for course coordination. All hands-on components of engine driver training courses will be conducted onthe specific vehicle or vehicle type the driver will be operating. Equivalent courses that satisfy driver training requirements, such asthe National Safety Council-sanctioned Emergency Vehicle Operator Course (EVOC), will be approved in writing bythe Fire Operations Division Chief (FA-300) ona case-by-case basis. BLM engine driver training satisfies the BLM requirement for 4X4 driver training stated inH-1112-1, chapter 15.
BLM Smokejumpers Smokejumpers operate in teams oftwo to eight firefighters and are used primarily for wildfire suppression, fuels reduction, and other fire management duties. Smokejumpers can perform self-contained, initial attack suppression operations, and commonly provide incident management capability atthe type 3 complexity level. Smokejumpers provide personnel to type 1and type 2 complexity incidents as complex command and general staff or other miscellaneous single resources. BLM smokejumper bases are located in Boise, Idaho, and Fairbanks, Alaska. BLM Smokejumper (SMKJ) Operations The Standards for Smokejumper Operations, BLM Ram-Air Training Manual (RATM), Great Basin Smokejumpers User Guide, Alaska Geographic Area Coordination Center Mob Guide, and other pertinent agreements and operating plans contain smokejumper operational and administrative procedures. BLM Smokejumper Mission Smokejumper aircraft are dispatched with a standard load of8 smokejumpers and equipment tobe self-sufficient for48 hours. A typical smokejumper mission takes 30 minutes over a fire. A spotter (senior smokejumper in charge of smokejumper missions) serves asthe mission coordinator on smokejumper missions. This may include coordinating smokejumper operation with on-scene aircraft over a fire until a qualified air tactical group supervisor (ATGS) arrives. BLM Smokejumper Coordination and Dispatch Smokejumpers area national shared resource and are ordered according to geographic area or national mobilization guides. The operational unit for smokejumpers is “one load” (8-12 smokejumpers). Specific information onthe coordination, dispatch, ordering, and use ofBLM smokejumpers canbe found inthe BLM Great Basin Smokejumpers User Guide, andin the Alaska Geographic Area Coordination Center Mob Guide. Contact BLM smokejumpers in Boise at (208) 387-5426 orin Alaska at (907) 356-5540 for these publications. BLM Ram-Air Parachute System Management The BLM has exclusive authority for all aspects ofBLM Ram-Air parachute system management and operations. This includes: • System Changes and Modifications – All BLM Ram-Air parachute system modifications, research, and development will be documented and approved using the BLM Smokejumper Modification Document (MODOC) System. • Ram-Air Training – All smokejumpers utilizing the BLM Ram-Air parachute system will adhere tothe training processes and procedures inthe BLM Ram-Air Training Manual. • Malfunction Abnormality and Reporting System (MARS) – MARS isa reporting system utilized to report and document malfunctions and abnormalities associated with smokejumper parachute jumping, parachute equipment, and parachute-related aircraft operations. The MARS database is hosted bythe USFS andis used by both the BLM and USFS to analyze malfunctions and abnormalities, identify trends, and initiate corrective actions. BLM retains exclusive authority to apply corrective actions toBLM equipment and procedures. • BLM-Approved Smokejumper Equipment List – All smokejumpers using the BLM Ram-Air parachute system will only utilize equipment listed inthe BLM-approved smokejumper equipment list unless specific approval is authorized through a MODOC. • Incidents, Reviews, and Accident Investigations – BLM smokejumpers will follow all procedures for accident review and investigation as outlined inthe Interagency Standards for Fire and Fire Aviation Operations, chapters 2and 18. The BLM smokejumpers will report incidents/accidents as appropriate, onthe National Technology and Development Program (NTDP) formerly known as Missoula Technology and Development Center (MTDC) Injury Reporting Form. ABLM smokejumper subject matter expert will participate inany investigation or review involving the BLM Ram-air parachute system. • Adherence to Agency Policies and Manuals – BLM will adhere toits own policies, guidelines, manuals, handbooks, and other operational documents as they pertain to smokejumper parachuting operations. The smokejumper base managers will work through established command channels to change BLM Ram-air parachute system policies, guidelines, manuals, handbooks, and other operational documents, and/orto request research and development ofnew products. BLM Smokejumper Aircraft Smokejumpers use aircraft approved bythe Interagency Smokejumper Aircraft Screening and Evaluation Subcommittee (SASES). All aviation operations will be performed according to agency policies and procedures. Smokejumper-specific aviation standards are identified inthe BLM Smokejumper Air Operations Manual.
BLM Smokejumper Training To ensure proficiency and safety, smokejumpers complete annual training in aviation, parachuting, fire suppression, administration, and safety. Experienced smokejumpers receive annual refresher training in these areas. First-year smokejumpers undergo a rigorous 4-to-5-week training program. Candidates are evaluated to determine: • Level of physical fitness • Ability to learn and perform smokejumper skills • Ability to work asa team member • Attitude • Ability to think clearly and remain productive ina stressful environment BLM Smokejumper Training and Qualification Targets Position IQCS Target Smokejumper Training Target Department managers Complex command and general staff Spotter ICT3, DIVS, ATGS, RXB2, safety officer type 3 (SOF3) Senior smokejumper Strike team leader (STL), TFLD Senior rigger, field observer (FOBS) Smokejumper ICT4, CRWB, FIRB Fire effects monitor (FEMO) Rookie smokejumper ICT5 BLM Smokejumper Jump Proficiency Guideline To ensure proficiency and safety, itis the goal ofBLM smokejumpers to perform a training or operational jump every 14 days. A longer period between jumps can occur dueto fire assignments or other duties. Guidelines for managing gaps between jumps beyond 14 days are included inthe BLM Ram-air Training Manual. Funding for currency and/or training jumps are included inthe home unit's normal preparedness budgets. Units hosting contingents or spike bases will notbe charged for any proficiency jump or related activities. BLM Smokejumper Physical Fitness Standards The BLM smokejumper physical fitness standards are mandatory. All BLM smokejumpers must pass the BLM smokejumper physical fitness standards to perform training or operational jumps. BLM smokejumper chiefs are authorized to allow refresher training jumps for experienced jumpers if course conditions are unsafe for runs or packs. BLM Smokejumper Physical Fitness Standards (Two options)*: • 1.5-mile runin 10:47 minutes or less, or • 3-mile backpacking with a110-pound load within 65 minutes 30 push-ups6 pull-ups Arduous WCT * Successful completion of both elements is required during smokejumper rookie training. Retesting Retesting criteria include: • Returning smokejumpers are allowed three opportunities to pass the BLM smokejumper physical fitness standards. Each retest will occur no sooner than 24 hours after failing the previous test and will consist ofall elements ofthe smokejumper physical fitness test. • Smokejumper candidates have one opportunity to pass the BLM smokejumper physical fitness standards. • Ifan employee sustains an injury (verified bya licensed medical provider) during a test, the test will not count asan attempt. Once an injured employee has been released for full duty, the employee will be given time to prepare for the test (notto exceed 4 weeks).
BLM Exclusive Use Helitack Crews The BLM contracts type 1, type 2or type 3 exclusive useof vendor-supplied and -supported helicopters inBLM districts throughout the United States. Helitack crews are assigned to manage each contracted helicopter and perform suppression and support operations to accomplish fire and resource management objectives. Each contract specifies a mandatory availability period (MAP) that the aircraft will be assigned for the exclusive useof the BLM. The National Aviation Office provides the funding topay for the aircraft’s availability costs. The BLM host unit is responsible for providing a helitack crew meeting the minimum experience and qualification requirements specified inthe Fire Helicopter Crew Position Descriptions and Selective Placement Factors in this chapter. The minimum daily staffing level (seven-day staffing) must meet the level indicated inthe NWCG Standards for Helicopter Operations, chapter 2 (PMS 510). BLM helicopters operated in Alaska need only be staffed with a qualified helicopter manager. The host unit is also responsible for providing administrative support; equipment, vehicles, and facilities for helitack crews as specified inthe NWCG Standards for Helicopter Operations; and other associated specialized equipment. The primary mission for lower 48 exclusive-use helicopter programs is initial attack. While most effective at providing rapid initial attack response, crews are well equipped to respond to extended-attack incidents and critical need missions on large fires. BLM Exclusive-Use Helicopter Locations State Location NWCG Type AK Fairbanks 2 (4 each), 3 (3 each) AZ Wickenburg 3St. George 3CA Apple Valley 2CO Rifle 3ID Boise 1 Twin Falls 2MT Billings 3NV Elko 3 (2 each) Las Vegas 3OR Burns 2 Lakeview 2 Vale 3UT Moab 3 Salt Lake City 3WY Rawlins 3 Fire Helicopter Crew Position Descriptions and Selective Placement Factors Guidance for utilization ofDOI standard position descriptions and selective placement factors when recruiting and filling positions onBLM exclusive use helitack crews canbe found at https://doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/blm- fa/SitePages/BLM-0456-Series-Toolbox.aspx. The DOI standard position descriptions (SPDs) and the National Wildfire Coordinating Group (NWCG) qualification requirements will be utilized when recruiting and filling positions on exclusive use helitack crews. Human resources specialists should first consult FMOs for questions on NWCG qualifications orthe Interagency Fire Program Management (IFPM) position standards. Management Actions for Noncompliant Remote Automatic Weather Stations Fire managers must be cognizant that all RAWS will notbe 100% compliant with standards established inthe NWCG Standards for Fire Weather Stations, PMS 426-3, atall times. Furthermore, even when RAWS are fully compliant and operational, RAWS data should be used only in conjunction with other predictive services and fireline data sources in fire management decision making, particularly atthe tactical level. Fire managers must monitor RAWS status and recognize when a station is noncompliant. Noncompliant stations are broadly categorized as follows:
• Inoperative station. This station is noncompliant but poses no danger of providing inaccurate weather data because itis not transmitting data. • Operating station that has exceeded the required maintenance cycle. These stations are identified inthe weekly “Wildland Fire Management Information (WFMI) Weather Noncompliance Report” (https://raws.nifc.gov/standards-guidelines) via email. Although transmitted data maybe accurate, noncompliance means the data should notbe trusted. • Operating station that transmits data outside ofPMS 426-3 standards dueto faulty sensors or components. These stations are most easily identified by local users who are familiar with environmental trends and conditions and can recognize data that seems abnormal or clearly unrepresentative of current conditions. This usually indicates faulty sensors or components. When noncompliant RAWS are identified or suspected, fire managers should implement the following hazard mitigation actions to expedite RAWS repair andto reduce risk to fire personnel: • Contact the RAWS Help Desk (208-387-5475 or rawshelp@blm.gov). Identify the station and discuss troubleshooting steps or schedule the necessary repairs. If there are trained personnel inthe local area, the Help Desk maybe able to ship the required parts and coordinate the repairs via phone. Ifa professional technician needs to make a site visit, provide a local individual to assist, and use this opportunity to provide training for local personnel. • Ensure that appropriate personnel and organizations know which stations are out of compliance and which sensors are affected, if possible. Direct personnel to alternative weather data sources if possible. • Use nearby compliant RAWS if available. • Based on local knowledge of specific RAWS problems (e.g., which sensor isout of compliance), separate reliable data from unreliable data. • Consider using data from belt weather kit readings, other portable device observations, predictive services or National Weather Service offices, ornon-fire weather sources, such as airports. Fire managers should ensure that local portable RAWS are compliant prior touse; noncompliant portable RAWS will notbe activated for data processing via WFMI weather. Sagebrush Rangeland and Sage-Grouse Conservation Related to Wildland Fire Firefighter and public safety has been, and continues tobe, the BLM’s highest fire management priority. Protecting, conserving, and restoring the sagebrush rangelands and sage-grouse habitat are among BLM fire management’s highest natural resource objectives. The BLM’s management responsibilities include taking actions on public lands to control and manage wildfire and invasive plants to protect, conserve, and restore the sagebrush rangelands and sage-grouse habitat. The BLM’s goal isto limit acres burned and damaged within and adjacent to sage-grouse habitat. The BLM will meet this goal through the certain management actions, including fuels management, fire operations, and post fire recovery. The following provides guidance to convey leader’s intent while recognizing that not all these actions and activities apply toall affected offices and successful implementation may look different throughout the BLM. Prior to, during, and following wildfires, BLM field offices will: • Protect, conserve, and restore sagebrush rangelands and sage-grouse habitat. • Strive to maintain and enhance resilience ofthe sagebrush rangelands, including through fuels and vegetation treatments. • Foster existing relationships with partners and develop new cooperative relationships that will help bolster BLM capacity to protect sagebrush rangelands and sage-grouse habitat. With regard to fire operations in sagebrush rangelands and sage-grouse habitat, BLM field offices will: • Prioritize firefighter and public safety, including following our “Standard Firefighting Orders,” mitigate any “Watch-Out Situations,” and apply the principles of Lookouts, Communications, Escape Routes, and Safety Zones onall fire assignments. • Maintain a strong and proactive preparedness capability when conditions indicate potential for multiple ignitions and large fire growth. • Maintain situational awareness during suppression resource drawdown levels under multiple ignition and large fire growth conditions. • Boost suppression capability in critical sage-grouse habitat when severe fire weather conditions are predicted. • Generate interest in local residents and public land users becoming a trained and equipped fire response force to work in concert with existing partners.
• Expand the use of Rangeland Fire Protection Association (RFPA) or Rural Fire Department (RFD) suppression resources. • Continue and expand efforts to train and use local, non-Federal agency individuals as liaisons in wildland fire detection and suppression operations. TheFA may continue to review wildfires occurring in sagebrush rangelands and sage-grouse habitat as part ofthe Significant Wildland Fire Review (SWFR) process. A SWFR maybe conducted, in part, when there are significant political, social, natural resource, complexity, size, or policy concerns; significant and complicated cost-share or multi-jurisdictional issues; orthe affected line officer requests a review. When sage-grouse habitat is burned or threatened by wildland fires burning onor originating onBLM-managed lands, reporting requirements and documentation inthe Incident Status Summary (ICS-209) regarding the impact to sage-grouse habitat should bein accordance with NMAC correspondence #2015-7 dated June 23, 2015, and the OWF Memorandum #2015-007. For additional guidance on sage-grouse inputs tothe ICS-209, see the National Interagency Standards for Resource Mobilization. Current habitat designations geospatial data layers (https://sage-grouse-habitat-burn-summary- nifc.hub.arcgis.com/apps/nifc::blm-sg-national-fire-dashboard-2025/explore) are provided tothe WFDSS system and for calculating acres burned. BLM Use ofthe Wildland Fire Decision Support System BLM follows interagency policy regarding useof the Wildland Fire Decision Support System (WFDSS). Standards for when WFDSS will be used are found in chapter 11. The following information provides direction for BLM AADM engagement inthe WFDSS decision-making and documentation process for published decisions involving multiple jurisdictions. When BLM Initiates a Wildland Fire Decision Support System Decision The BLM AADM is responsible for ensuring affected Federal agencies are notified as soon as practicable and provided an opportunity to participate inthe WFDSS decision process. Documentation of coordination with AADMs from each affected Federal agency within the WFDSS planning area should be included inthe decision rationale. Additionally, the AADM should continue to engage affected Federal, Tribal, State, and local agencies as appropriate. See the following examples of WFDSS decision rationale documentation tobe included on multi-jurisdictional fires. • Documentation of engagement with other agencies: “The following jurisdictions were engaged in this decision-making process [identify all jurisdictions] and coordination between agency administrator(s) will be ongoing to ensure Incident objectives and requirements continue tobe tied to each agency’s strategic objectives and management requirements.” • Other agency declines engagement dueto lack of threat: “The agency administrator for the [jurisdictional agency] was invited to engage asan approver in this decision but declined because the fire is currently nota threat tothe agency’s lands at this time. Coordination with the agency administrator will be ongoing to ensure opportunities to engage inthe decision process are provided when there isa reasonable expectation that the fire might threaten or impact the [jurisdictional agency] lands or contingency suppression actions may occur on their lands.” • Other agency declines engagement dueto no additional impacts to their lands: “The agency administrator for the [jurisdictional agency] was invited to engage asan approver in this decision but declined because the fire has burned completely through their agency’s lands andno further suppression actions or suppression repair will occur on their lands.” When Other Agency (non-BLM) initiates a WFDSS Decision When BLM-managed lands are included ina wildfire’s planning area fora WFDSS decision initiated by another agency, the BLM AADM must participate inthe WFDSS decision process. Ifa BLM AADM requests to participate inthe decision process foran incident that has BLM-managed lands within the planning area butis denied that opportunity, notify the BLM state fire management officer who will work to rectify the situation. BLM Use of Formalized Strategic Planning on Wildland Fires A formalized strategic planning process should be utilized during all BLM fires that have a complex incident management team (CIMT) assigned. Strategic planning ensures a common understanding bythe agency
administrator(s) (AADM) and members ofthe CIMT ofthe values at risk (including responder risk), the strategic actions tobe implemented and the timing of those actions, and the anticipated probability of success of operations, ensuring a planned and appropriate response. Strategic direction should align with land and resource management plans, fire management plans, and associated amendments as detailed inthe WFDSS decision. BLM AADMs are expected to participate inthe strategic planning process when BLM lands are impacted by wildfire, either asthe jurisdictional or protecting agency. The Incident Strategic Alignment Process (ISAP) maybe utilized to ensure alignment between incident management teams and agency administrators. BLM Global Positioning System Datum and Coordinate Format Standard To ensure safe and efficient suppression operations, all BLM fire resources will usea standard GPS datum and latitude/longitude (coordinate) format when communicating GPS references. The standard datum is WGS84, and the standard coordinate format is Degrees Decimal Minutes (DDM). For other activities (e.g., mapping, planning), agency standards will apply.
Chapter 3 National Park Service Program Organization and Responsibilities Introduction This chapter summarizes specific requirements for National Park Service (NPS) fire management programs. Fire managers should consult DO-18 Wildland Fire andRM-18 Wildland Fire for full guidance and descriptions of requirements summarized in this chapter. If there isa discrepancy between guidance found in this document and Directors Order (DO) or Reference Manual (RM)-18, information contained herein will be considered authoritative as updates occur ona more frequent cycle than either theDO orRM. Employee Conduct All employees, cooperators, contractors, and volunteers who participate in wildland fire activities have the duty to treat each other with respect andto maintain a work environment free of harassment and misconduct. This includes conduct broader than the legal definitions of harassment and sexual harassment. Harassment becomes illegal when enduring the offensive conduct becomes a condition of continued employment orthe conduct is sufficiently severe or pervasive asto create a work environment that a reasonable person would consider intimidating, hostile, or abusive. Employees are subject to disciplinary action, upto and including removal, for engaging in harassing conduct while inthe workplace orin any work-related situation, including while on official travel. Off-duty misconduct (e.g., harassing aco-worker, visitor, contractor, or volunteer during off-duty hours) may subject the employee to potential discipline ifthe misconduct is likely to have an adverse effect onthe NPS More extensive information, including howto report misconduct or harassment, is found in Director's Order 16E. Office of Wildland Fire (OWF) Policy Memorandum 2018-011, Implementing Procedures for the Department ofthe Interior (DOI) Personnel Bulletin 18-01: Prevention and Elimination of Harassing Conduct for DOI employees deployed to fire (or other emergency) incidents (provides clarification for implementing the DOI Personnel Bulletin 18-01, Prevention and Elimination of Harassing Conduct policy while employees are deployed on incidents. • OWF Policy Memorandum 2018-011 • DOI Personnel Bulletin 18-01 Agency Administrator Roles Director The Director ofthe NPSis responsible tothe Secretary ofthe DOI for fire management programs on public lands administered bythe NPS. The Division of Fire and Fire Aviation Management is responsible tothe Director for Policy Formulation and Program Oversight. The Chief, Division of Fire and Aviation Management will meet the required elements outlined inthe Management Performance Requirements for Fire Operations. Regional Director The regional director is responsible tothe Director for fire management programs and activities within their region. The regional director will meet the required elements outlined inthe Management Performance Requirements for Fire Operations and ensure training is completed to support delegations to line managers and principal actings. Park Superintendent The park superintendent is responsible tothe regional director for the safe and efficient implementation of fire management activities within their unit, including cooperative activities with other agencies or landowners in accordance with delegations of authorities. The park superintendent or principal acting will meet the required elements outlined inthe Management Performance Requirements for Fire Operations.
Agency Administrator Management Performance Requirements for Fire Operations PERFORMANCE REQUIRED NPS Director Regional Director Park Supt. 1. Take necessary and prudent actions to ensure firefighter and public safety. XXX2. Ensures sufficient qualified fire and non-fire personnel are available each year to support fire operations ata level commensurate with the local and national fire situation. Ensures that all training and certification of fire and non-fire personnel is completed as required to support fire operations atthe local and national level. XXX3. Ensure fire management officers (FMOs) are fully qualified as identified inthe Interagency Fire Program Management Qualification Standards. XXX4. Provide a written delegation of authority onan annual basis to individual(s) responsible for wildland fire management activities to ensure an adequate level of operational authority. Depending on park organizational structure, written delegations maybe provided tothe chief ranger, natural resource specialist, FMO, designated fire coordinator, park group FMO, orto individuals from neighboring fire management organizations, provided a written agreement or memorandum of understanding isin-place. Where applicable, an inter-park agreement that specifies the reciprocal responsibilities ofthe superintendent and park group FMO assigned DO, will be prepared. This inter-park agreement will be accompanied byan annual delegation of authority. Both the delegation of authority and inter-park agreement will remain valid until rescinded by either party, updates are needed, or personnel changes necessitate a revision and update. As appropriate, the delegation of authority will specify multi-agency coordination (MAC) group authorities. XXX5. Park units with burnable vegetation must have an approved Fire Management Plan (FMP). Park Superintendent must sign the FMP cover page after FMO and Regional / Zone Fire Planner review and signature onan annual basis. All NPS FMPs must align with the (2014) DOI Fire Management Plan template by October 1, 2024 andbe uploaded tothe SharePoint site Wildland Fire A123 - Home (sharepoint.com). X6. Review and approve wildfire preparedness and fuels management funding based onan accurate and defensible readiness analysis. Ensure useof fire funds isin compliance with DOI and agency policies. XXX7. Develop fire management standards and constraints that arein compliance with agency fire policies. XX8. Ensure compliance with the collection, storing, and aggregation of wildland fire program core geospatial data (http://share.nps.gov/firegis). X9. Management teams will meet annually to review fire and aviation policies, roles, responsibilities, and delegations of authority. Specifically address oversight and management controls, critical safety issues and high-risk situations, such as team transfers of command, periods of multiple fire activity, and Red Flag Warnings. XXX
PERFORMANCE REQUIRED NPS Director Regional Director Park Supt. 10. Review safety policies, procedures, and concerns with field fire and fire aviation personnel. Discussions should include issues that could compromise safety and effectiveness during the upcoming season. X11. Ensure timely follow-up actions to program reviews, fire preparedness reviews, fire and fire aviation safety reviews, fire critiques and post-season reviews. XXX12. Ensure fire and fire aviation preparedness reviews are conducted inall units annually. Parks must complete checklists applicable to their specific program scope and complexity and include appropriate program elements, such as prescribed fire. A summary ofthe preparedness review findings including standards exceeded or needing improvement will be submitted tothe regional FMO before the fire season. XX13. Ensure an approved burn plan is followed for each prescribed fire project; technical review, Prescribed Fire Go/No-Go Checklist (PMS 484-1, Element 2B), and Agency Administrator Ignition Authorization (PMS 484-1, Element 2A) are completed; and follow-up monitoring and documentation to ensure management objectives are met. XX14. Ensure air quality exceedance reviews are completed in cooperation with the NPS Air Resource Division. XXX15. Meet annually with major cooperators and review interagency agreements to ensure continued effectiveness and efficiency (maybe delegated). XX16. Ensure post fire reviews are conducted onall fires that escape initial attack orare managed as long-term incidents. Participate inall reviews that require management byany type of incident management team (regional director may delegate). XX17. Provide management oversight by personally visiting wildland and prescribed fires each year. X18. Provide incident management objectives, written delegations of authority, and agency administrator (AADM) briefings to IMTs. See chapter 11, Agency Administrator Responsibilities. X19. Monitor wildfire potential and provide oversight during periods of critical fire activity/situations. XXX20. Ensure resource advisors are identified, trained, available, and appropriately assigned to wildland fire incidents. Refer to Resource Advisor’s Guide for Wildland Fire, PMS 313, August 2017. X21. Convene and participate in annual preseason and postseason fire meetings. XXX22. Ensure park superintendents who have potential wildland fire response in their park, their designated acting superintendents, and supervisors of fire management officers (FMOs) attain and maintain the AADM qualification inthe Incident Qualifications and Certification System (IQCS). The qualification must be attained within two years of appointment. XX23. Ensure appropriate investigations are conducted for accidents (as defined in chapter 18), entrapments, shelter deployments, and related events. XXX
PERFORMANCE REQUIRED NPS Director Regional Director Park Supt. 24. For all unplanned, human-caused fires where liability canbe determined, ensure actions are initiated to recover cost of suppression activities, land rehabilitation, and damages tothe resource and improvements. XX25. Ensure there is adequate direction in fire management plans to identify fire danger awareness with escalating fire potential. X26. NPS superintendents or other designated approving officials will maintain WFDSS user profiles (as appropriate), allowing them to approve wildfire decisions in WFDSS. X27. Ensure compliance with departmental and agency policy, as well as regional office direction for prescribed fire activities and ensure that periodic reviews and inspections ofthe prescribed fire program are completed. XXX28. Review prescribed fire plans and recommend or approve the plans depending upon the delegated authority. Ensure that each prescribed fire plan has been reviewed and recommended bya qualified technical reviewer who was not involved in plan preparation. X29. Serves asthe management official (MO) within the DOI Wildland Firefighter Medical Standards Program. XX Fire Management Staff Roles National Office The Chief, Division of Fire and Aviation (FAM Chief), NPS-NIFC, is responsible and accountable for developing policy, program direction, and international coordination. The FAM Chief, along with the branch chiefs for wildland fire and aviation, work with interagency cooperators to coordinate, reduce duplication, increase efficiencies in wildland fire management and aviation, and provide feedback to regional offices on performance requirements. Regional Office The regional fire management officer (RFMO) provides leadership for their fire and fire aviation management program. The RFMO is responsible and accountable for providing planning, coordination, training, technical guidance, and oversight tothe park fire management programs. The RFMO also represents the regional director on interagency geographic coordination groups and multi-agency coordination (MAC) groups. The RFMO provides feedback to units on performance requirements. Park The fire management officer (FMO) is responsible and accountable for providing leadership for fire and fire aviation management programs atthe local level. The FMO determines program requirements to implement land use decisions through the Fire Management Plan (FMP) to meet land management objectives. The FMO negotiates interagency agreements (contracting/agreements officer must review and process agreement) and represents the AADM on local interagency fire and fire aviation groups. The superintendent shall annually provide and update the expectations of wildland fire program leaders by means ofa limited delegation of authority that encompasses the scope of duties outlined above. In addition, an inter park agreement maybe used to further define expectations for those cases where a park zone FMO (or designee) handles defined duties on behalf of another NPS unit within the defined park zone. Fire Management Staff Performance Requirements for Fire Operations PERFORMANCE REQUIRED FAM CHIEF RFMO FMO Program Management 1. Manages a safe, effective, and efficient fire program. XXX2. Ensure Fire and Fire Aviation Management actions reflect the NPS’s commitment to firefighter and public safety. XXX
PERFORMANCE REQUIRED FAM CHIEF RFMO FMO3. Ensure budget requests and allocations reflect analyzed anticipated workload. XXX4. Ensure fiscal responsibility and accountability in planning and expenditures. XXX5. Develop and implement communications strategies for internal and external audiences. XXX6. Develop and maintain agreements, operating plans, and contracts onan interagency basis to increase effectiveness and efficiencies. XXX7. Work with cooperators to identify processes and procedures for providing fire safe communities. XX8. Ensure completion ofa job hazard analysis (JHA) for fire and fire aviation activities. X9. Ensure wildland fire program core spatial data is collected, stored, and aggregated based onNPS standards (http://share.nps.gov/firegis). XX10. Review and evaluate performance ofthe fire management organization to correct deficiencies and highlight success. XXX11. Provide fire personnel with adequate guidance and decision-making authority to ensure timely decisions. XX12. Ensure fire and fire aviation policies are understood, followed, and coordinated with other agencies as appropriate. XXX13. Monitor fire season severity predictions, fire behavior, and fire activity levels. Take actions to ensure safe, efficient, and effective operations. XXX14. Assess, identify, and implement program actions that effectively reduce unwanted wildland fire ignitions and mitigate risks to life, property, and resources. XX15. Complete trespass actions when unplanned, human-caused ignitions occur. XX16. Recognize when complexity levels exceed program capabilities. Increase administrative, managerial, and operational resources to meet the need. XXX17. Utilize the NWCG Wildland Fire Risk and Complexity Assessment to ensure the proper level of management is assigned toall incidents. XX18. For all fires identified as requiring a WFDSS decision in chapter 11, ensure local unit staff specialists are engaged in development and that all decisions are consistent with the objectives and requirements contained inthe park’s fire management plan. X19. Ensure effective transfer of command of incident management occurs and oversight isin place. XXX20. Ensure incoming personnel and crews are briefed prior to fire and fire aviation assignments. XX21. Ensure work/rest and length of assignment guidelines are followed during all fire and fire aviation activities. Deviations must be approved and documented. XXX22. Provide for and personally participate in periodic site visits to individual incidents and projects. XXX
PERFORMANCE REQUIRED FAM CHIEF RFMO FMO23. Initiate, conduct, and participate in fire- management- related reviews and investigations, including prescribed fires declared wildfires. XXX24. Ensure that reports and records are properly completed and maintained. XXX Planning 25. Develop and maintain, aFMP. Ensure policy alignment by completing a annual park and regional review. Ensure applicable park resource management objectives are included inthe Fire Management Plan (FMP). XX26. Develop and maintain operational plans, e.g., preparedness level, staffing, prevention. XXX27. Ensure all fire management actions are consistent with those approved inthe fire management plan (FMP) and environmental compliance documentation. XX28. Integrate fire into interdisciplinary planning efforts. XXX Fuels Management 29. Ensure a written/approved prescribed fire/ mechanical treatment plan is based onthe current fire management plan and project level NEPA (Section 106, Section 7and NHPA) has been completed for each prescribed fire ornon-fire treatment. X30. Ensure compliance with national and regional policy and direction for prescribed fire activities and ensure that periodic reviews and inspections ofthe Prescribed Fire Program are completed. XXX Training/Workforce 31. Recruit train, equip, and direct a qualified workforce. XXX32. Ensures compliance with DOI Wildland Firefighter Medical Standards processes to include risk mitigation/waiver processes. XXX33. Establish incident qualification card certification/ qualification process atthe local level and ensure that only trained and qualified personnel are assigned to fire and fire aviation duties. XXX34. Ensures developmental needs are identified and supported for fire and aviation program and supporting staff. XXX35. Ensures IQCS accounts are established, and training records are maintained for AADMs. XX Fire Management Leadership Board The Fire Management Leadership Board (FMLB) is established under the authority ofthe Chief, Division of Fire and Aviation Management. The purpose of FMLB isto provide leadership for the National Park Service (NPS) Wildland Fire Management Program through strategic planning and coordination to implement a safe and effective fire management program within the NPS. The FMLB will: • Develop and implement a Wildland Fire Management Strategic Plan and Wildland Fire Policy; • Facilitate integrating park, regional and national perspectives in support ofthe Wildland Fire Strategic Plan and Wildland Fire Policy; • Develop and recommend strategic direction for long-term NPS Wildland Fire Management Program issues, policies, programs and systems, including the role ofthe interagency community, to meet the NPS mission; • Develop and recommend budget priorities tothe Branch Chief, Wildland Fire;
• Develop budget and financial management guidance and business rules for the NPS Wildland Fire Management Program; • Communicate with management and leadership regarding wildland fire management program issues and needs; • Promote/advocate integrating fire programs with other NPS programs; and • Address recruitment/retention, succession planning, and organizational efficiency. Requirements for Fire Management Positions All NPS employees assigned dedicated fire management program responsibilities atthe park, regional, or national level shall meet established interagency and NPS competencies (knowledge, skills, and abilities) and associated qualifications. All NPS employees assigned to wildland fire management incidents will meet the training and qualification standards setby the National Wildfire Coordinating Group (NWCG). Refer to chapter 13for specific requirements. All wildland fires will be managed byan individual qualified and certified atthe command level appropriate tothe complexity level ofthe incident. The qualification standards identified inthe Interagency Fire Program Management Qualifications Standards will be required, in conjunction with specific agency requirements, when filling vacant fire program positions andas anaid in developing individual development plans (IDPs) for employees. Training Training for Fire Management Officers The following training is required for fire management officers (FMO): • Fire Program Management, an Overview (M-581). NPS Firefighters General Training Requirements The following training is required for agency permanent, career seasonal and temporary firefighters. Administratively Determined (AD) and collateral duty holders ofan incident qualifications card maybe required to adhere tothe agency training requirements below provided their qualifications place them ina category of employee which requires the training based onNPS policy references listed inthe table: Required Training Initial Requirement/ Frequency Completion Tracking Method Reference First Aid/ Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) • Upon initial employment • Every 3 years orper certifying authority • Instructor-led • Unit safety manager RM-50B, Section 4 HAZMAT - First Responder Awareness Level • Upon initial employment • Annually • Minimum ofone-hour online course initially and annually • Instructor-led • Unit safety manager • DOI Talent OSHA Publication 2254 Wildland Fire Safety Training Annual Refresher (RT-130)1 • No minimum hourly requirement • Annually • IQCS RM-18Ch. 10 Bloodborne Pathogens • Annual for employees at increased risk dueto assigned duties (e.g., IHC, helitack, wildland fire modules [WFM], engine crews) • Locally taught orDOI Talent • Instructor • DOI Talent RM-51Ch. 51 RT-130is not required for all responder qualifications. See PMS 310-1and Federal Wildland Fire Qualifications Supplement for specific requirements.
Structural Fire and Hazardous Materials Response All fires that are not Wildland are considered structural and are subject tothe requirements and standards of Directors Order (DO) and Reference Manual (RM) #58. All employees responding to structural fires must meet or exceed the qualifications, training, standards and regulations identified inDO andRM #58. Delegation of Authority Delegation for Regional Fire Management Officers In order to effectively perform their duties, the RFMO must have certain authorities delegated from the regional director. The delegation of authority should include the following roles and responsibilities: • Serves asthe regional director’s authorized representative on geographic area coordination groups, including MAC groups. • Coordinate and establish priorities on uncommitted fire suppression resources during periods of shortages. • Coordinate wildland fire planning, response, and evaluation regionwide. • Relocate agency presuppression/suppression resources within the region based on fire potential/activity. • Correct unsafe fire suppression activities. • Direct accelerated, aggressive initial attack when appropriate. • Develop and maintain agreements to provide for the management, fiscal, and operational functions of combined agency-operated facilities. • Suspend prescribed fire activities when warranted. Give authorization to hire emergency firefighters in accordance with the DOI Administratively Determined (AD) Pay Plan for Emergency Workers. • Ensure smoke impacts tothe public and fire personnel are addressed by ensuring that Air Resource Advisors (ARA, technical specialist) are ordered to work as part of IMTs tothe maximum extent practicable for wildfires classified as having Type 1 Incident Complexity in NWCG Wildland Fire Risk and Complexity Assessment, PMS 236. Ensure assignment of ARAs as part of IMTs for Type 2 Incident Complexity fires (asper Public Law 116-9, the Dingell Act, 2019, when appropriate to address smoke impacts" (https://www.congress.gov/116/plaws/publ9/PLAW-116publ9.pdf). Ensure measures to protect public health from the adverse health impacts of wildland fire smoke through monitoring of smoke and communication of potential impacts from smoke is considered for all wildfires (Wildland Fire and Air Quality Coordination Secretarial MOU between USDA, DOI, EPA, and CDC (https://www.usda.gov/sites/default/files/documents/usda-epa-doi-cdc-mou.pdf). Additionally, all wildfires should consider ordering anAir Resource Advisor to work as part of IMTs when concerns regarding public health, transportation safety, or personnel safety issues from smoke are elevated. NPS Simple Six Wildfire Notification Tool This NPS Simple Six Form standardizes emerging incident reports and updates of existing incidents from the local to regional andif necessary national Fire Duty Officers for incidents onNPS lands or those posing and immediate threat toNPS jurisdiction. The form will be utilized when anyof the following conditions apply: • Park or area closures are occurring or will likely occur; • Evacuations of park administrative areas andor visitors is occurring or will likely occur (housing campgrounds, other admin facilities etc.); • There are significant political concerns that would rise toa regional or national level and/orbe reported onby the media; • Significant risk to high value assets and/or resources exists; • There are injuries or fatalities to firefighters orNPS staff and/or visitors. The NPS simple six form link maybe found onthe NPS FAM SharePoint site. NPS Fire Situation Dashboard The application is primarily intended to support duty officers in maintaining awareness and assisting in upward reporting of wildland fire activities onor near NPS lands. The application delivers real-time fire situation information on current wildland fire incidents within and near National Park Service units. This application provides a consistent, national picture of fire activities impacting NPS lands. The application reduces the reporting necessary when a park unit hasa fire. The dashboard has the capability to notify staff of wildfire related activities ina timely fashion and minimizes work required to report information up. Ifa fire is reported toa CAD, information will be available toall levels ofNPS within afew minutes.
NPS Duty Officer National Duty Officer The Branch of Wildland Fire will maintain a national duty officer and post the name and contact information onthe NPS Duty Officer Dashboard. The national duty officer is responsible for: • Providing coordination and prioritization of prepositioned assets between regions ifthe need arises; • Resolving disagreements of asset priorities and/or mobilizations by elevating issues tothe Operations Program Lead or designee; • Facilitating movement of assets using established dispatch/coordination system protocols; • Providing briefings and updates tothe Operations Program Lead/NPS NMAC representative as requested; • Ensuring emergency notifications are made according to Division of Fire and Aviation Management protocols; • Establishing periodic duty officer coordination calls as fire activity (prescribed and/or wildfire) dictate; • Reviewing and summarizing NPS “simple six” submissions tothe NPS Operations Program Lead and Wildland Fire Branch Chief as outlined inthe NPS National Duty Officer Guide. Region Duty Officer Each region will maintain a region-level duty officer (DO) and post the name and contact information onthe NPS Duty Officer Dashboard. Region DOs are responsible for: • Establishing a process to identify available assets or needs within their region; • Facilitating movement of assets using established dispatch/coordination system protocols; • Communicating availability ofor need for assets to other region DOs; • Approving asset assignments; • Ensuring emergency notifications are made tothe national DO; • Ensuring NPS “simple six” submissions are reviewed and forwarded tothe national DOas outlined inthe NPS national DO guide. Park Duty Officer Park/Zone fire management officers are responsible for ensuring duty officer coverage during any period of predicted incident and/or mobilization activities. DO’s responsibilities maybe performed byany individual with a signed delegation of authority from the local AADM. TheDO maybe ina location remote from the park, but will be familiar with local incident response procedures, agreements, and resources. The required duties for Park/Zone DOs are: • Monitor unit incident activities for compliance with NPS safety policies. • Coordinate and set priorities for unit suppression actions and resource allocation. • Keep AADMs, suppression resources, and information officers informed ofthe current and expected situation. • Ensures submission ofthe NPS Simple Six form to notify Regional Staff and National Staff of significant fires onor threatening NPS lands. • Plan for and implement actions required for future needs. • Document all decisions and actions. DOs will provide operational oversight of these requirements as well asany specific duties assigned by fire managers through the fire operating plan. DOs will not fill any Incident Command System (ICS) functions connected toany incident. Inthe event that theDO is required to accept an incident assignment, the FMO will ensure that another authorized DOis in place prior tothe departure ofthe outgoing DO. Engine Operating Standards Vehicle Color and Marking Vehicles dedicated to wildland fire activities shall be white in color and have a single, four-inch-wide, red, reflective stripe placed according to NFPA 1906: Standard for Wildland Fire Apparatus (NFPA 1906 8.8.3, 2006 edition). The word “FIRE” (red with white background color) will be clearly visible onall four sides ofthe vehicle. The NPS arrowhead logo will be placed onthe front doors. The size and placement ofthe logo will beas specified inRM-9. An identifier will be placed onthe vehicle according to local zone or Geographic Area Coordination Center (GACC) directions. Roof numbers will be placed according to local zone procedures. Engine Module Standards Ifno engine boss (ENGB) is assigned, then the apparatus is designated asa patrol or prevention vehicle, notas an engine.
Type Minimum Personnel ENGB FFT2 (Minimum Qualification) 33 12 43 12 52 11 62 11 72* ** 1 Tactical Tender 21*** 1 * At least oneof which is FFT1 and ICT5 qualified. ** An ENGB is required for mobilization. *** Ifthe water tender is operated without an ENGB then itmay only fill non-tactical missions as described in chapter 14. • Additional personnel maybe requested bythe ordering unit and/or added bythe filling unit for mobilization. Lights-and-Sirens Response Responding to wildland fire incidents normally does not warrant the use of emergency lights and siren on public roads by calling foror blocking the right-of-way from other traffic in order to safely and effectively perform the NPS mission. However, there maybe rare and extenuating circumstances when limited useof emergency lights and sirens is appropriate and necessary dueto an immediate threat to life. Those units that determine an emergency lights-and-siren response on public roads is necessary to meet mission requirements must develop an operating plan that ensures the following: 1. All vehicles (command, engines, etc.) will be properly marked, equipped, and operated in accordance with State statutes, codes, permits and NPS requirements. 2. Drivers will complete training inthe proper useof lights-and-sirens response in accordance with National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 1451 Standard fora Fire Service Operations Training Program and 1002 Standard for Fire Apparatus Operator/Driver Professional Qualifications, as well asany State requirements. 3. Instructors of lights and sirens training must have successfully completed lights and sirens training as part ofa Federal engine academy, and Emergency Vehicle Operators Course (EVOC) anda facilitative instructor course. 4. Lights and sirens will meet NFPA and State code requirements. 5. Posted speed limits will be followed atall times, regardless of response type. 6. Drivers will stop atall controlled intersections (sign, light, traffic officer) before proceeding; drivers will stop or reduce speed as circumstances dictate prior to proceeding through any uncontrolled intersections. 7. Traffic light changing mechanisms (e.g., Opticons) will only be used under formal written agreement with State and local governments. They will be used only when they are necessary to create safe right-of-way through urban high-traffic areas. All pertinent State and local statutes and procedures will be adhered to. Vehicle Maintenance, Repairs and Replacement Daily preventative maintenance checks, regular servicing, and prompt repairs, and lifecycle replacement are critical to providing mission readiness, performance, and safe operation. Annual Safety Inspections, Scheduled Maintenance, and Daily Inspections Itis required to complete and document annual safety inspections, regularly scheduled preventative maintenance and daily (or pretrip) inspections for all NPS wildland fire vehicles. Annual safety inspections must be documented on Form 1520-35. Regularly scheduled preventative maintenance, unscheduled maintenance and repairs for interior owned (I-plate) vehicles is recorded inthe Financial and Business Management System (FBMS). Daily inspections must be recorded inthe Fire Equipment Maintenance Procedure and Record (FEMPR). The cost ofall vehicle repairs and maintenance isthe responsibility ofthe individual parks unless the damage is directly attributable to operations ona wildfire. In that case, with approval from theIC, the damages maybe paid for under the fire’s suppression account. Wildland fire vehicles that are not operationally sound or have safety deficiencies must notbe put into service. In addition, vehicles that suffer from mechanical or safety issues while en route oron assignment must be taken outof service atthe earliest opportunity in which itis safe todo soand must notbe put back into service until corrective action canbe completed.
Fixed Ownership Rates Fixed ownership rates (FORs) are fees that are paid into the Working Capital Fund (WCF) annually for each vehicle inthe program. These fees continue to accumulate over the life ofa vehicle and are used to replace the vehicle atthe endof its life cycle. The FOR is adjusted annually bythe WCF manager to reflect changes in input parameters. Equipment Bulletins and Equipment Alerts The NPS mirrors the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) two-level Equipment Bulletin (EB) and Equipment Alert (EA) System. The purpose ofthe system isto share accurate and timely information regarding potential equipment problems and/or needed repairs. TheEB is primarily intended to inform the equipment users of recommendations for repairs, potential hazards, or general information related tothe overall maintenance, awareness, and safe operation of fire equipment. TheEA is time sensitive and addresses potentially serious hazards or risks. The alert includes a specific action that the user must act upon. Unexpected issues involving wildland fire vehicles which donot fall under other types of wildland fire reviews and investigations and/or other applicable Federal, State or specific agency requirements must be reported. Ifan unexpected vehicle issue warrants anEB orEA itis issued bythe National Fire Equipment Program (NFEP) Manager through the Operations Advisory Team and the Capital Equipment Committee. Members of these groups must ensure the information reaches all levels ofthe organization. NPS Firefighter Target Physical Fitness Standards These are voluntary targets. They are not mandatory. These targets are established to provide NPS firefighters a common standard against which to gauge their physical fitness level. NPS firefighters are encouraged to meet or exceed these standards. Fitness Activity Age18-29Age 30-39Age 40-49Age 50and Up1.5-mile run11:5812:2513:0514:43Sit-ups (1 minute) 4036 3126 Push-ups (1 minute) 3327 2115 The guide below maybe used to adjust the1.5-mile run times to compensate for altitude differences: Altitude in Feet 1.5-mile Run Time Adjustment 0 - 5,000No adjustment 5,000 - 6,000 Add 30 seconds 6,000 - 7,000 Add 40 seconds 7,000 - 8,000 Add 50 seconds National Fire Operations Fitness Challenge The National Fire Operations Fitness Challenge (https://www.nifc.gov/about-us/our-partners/blm/training/fitness- challenge) encourages and recognizes achievement in physical fitness byNPS firefighters. The fitness challenge provides a common system by which NPS firefighters can measure current fitness, establish fitness goals, and track fitness improvement. The fitness challenge is voluntary, but NPS firefighters are encouraged to participate. The fitness challenge tests participants in four basic exercises: push-ups, pull-ups, sit-ups and a timed runof 1.5 miles. Test results are compiled into a final overall score. Unit and regional offices are encouraged to support and recognize achievement in firefighter fitness. Wildland Fire Uniform Standards The Servicewide Uniform Program Guideline (DO-43) sets forth the servicewide policies and associated legal mandates for wearing the NPS uniform and for authorizing allowances to employees. The guideline states that superintendents administer the uniform program within their areas and are responsible for developing and communicating local uniform and appearance standards in accordance with DO-43, determining who will wear the uniform and what uniform will be worn and enforcing uniform and appearance standards. Three options exist for uniforms for wildland fire personnel: • Within the context ofthe uniform standards, ifthe conventional NPS uniform is identified atthe local level as required for specified fire management staff, fire program management funds maybe used to support uniform purchases in accordance with allowance limits identified inDO-43.
• While Nomex® outerwear (i.e., shirts, trousers, brush-coats) routinely issued as personal protective equipment (PPE) has become recognized asthe uniform ofthe wildland firefighter asa matter of necessity, this apparel also has justifiable utility asa uniform standard atthe park level for certain fire and/or ONPS base-funded wildland fire staff. • When the conventional NPS uniform orthe full Nomex® outerwear isnot appropriate or justified, local management with park superintendent approval may establish a predetermined dress code for fire staff. The goals ofthe NPS Uniform Program can appropriately be applied (with common sense) to this departure from the norm. • The DOI boot policy is referenced in chapter 7. • The fire management officer is responsible for establishing a reasonable allotment schedule for new or returning employees, commensurate with supplies provided in previous seasons. A suggested per person issuance is three to four tee shirts, one ball cap, and one sweatshirt (where appropriate). Where appropriate and justified, fire funds maybe applied tothe purchase of100 percent cotton tee shirts, sweatshirts, and ball caps, with appropriate logo and color scheme, to augment the Nomex® outerwear worn in conjunction with project or wildland fire management incidents. Nomex® outerwear will usually be returned tothe park’s fire cache based onthe tour of duty (endof season, transfer to another park, etc.). Just as with uniform allowance discussed inDO-43, the intent of fire-funded purchases isto defray the cost ofthe appropriate apparel, not necessarily to cover the cost ofall items. This will not only be factored into the quantities deemed necessary for the individual but also preclude fire-funded purchases of fleece jackets, rain gear, and other personal items generally considered the responsibility of those employees not covered bythe NPS Uniform Program. Exceptions to this should be well-justified and documented. NPS Use of Wildland Fire Decision Support System Decision The internet-based WFDSS will bethe primary decision support documentation platform for all NPS wildfires. Refer to chapter 11for further guidance. National Park Service Specific Qualifications and Qualifications Exceptions Park superintendents who have potential wildland fire response in their park, their designated acting superintendents, and supervisors of fire management officers (FMOs) must attain and maintain the AADM qualification in IQCS. The qualification must be attained within two years of appointment. Requirements for the AADM qualification maybe found inthe Federal Wildland Fire Qualifications Supplement.
Chapter 4U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Program Organization and Responsibilities Introduction This document states, references, or supplements policy for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (Service orFWS) Wildland Fire Management Program. The standards provided in this document are based on current U.S. Department ofthe Interior (DOI) and Service Manual 621-FW1 policy and are intended to provide fire program direction. This document is updated more frequently than the Service Manual. Information that is contained within this document is considered authoritative. Memorandums will be issued to update the Service Manual to avoid discrepancies between guidance found in this document and the service manual. The intent isto ensure safe, consistent, efficient, and effective fire and aviation operations. This document will be reviewed and updated annually. Agency Administrator Roles Director The Director ofthe Fish and Wildlife Service has overall responsibility for the Service’s Wildland Fire Management Program. The Director will ensure regional fire management activities are formally evaluated. Chief, National Wildlife Refuge System The Chief ofthe National Wildlife Refuge System (NWRS) provides leadership for the Wildland Fire Management Program. The Chief also formally evaluates all regional fire activities as needed. The Assistant Director ofthe NWRS has delegated the authority to approve the Service Fire Management Handbook and other fire-related handbooks as needed to provide guidance tothe Chief, Branch of Fire Management. Regional Director Regional directors are responsible tothe Director for fire management programs and activities within their region. The regional director will meet the required elements outlined inthe Management Performance Requirements for Fire Operations and ensure training is completed to support delegations to line managers and principal actings. The regional director ensures that refuge managers/project leaders, and/or field supervisors are qualified to approve prescribed fire plans. For FWS-declared wildfire reviews, regardless of level, a draft copy ofthe final report will be submitted tothe agency’s National Fuels Management Specialist within 45 days ofthe fire being declared out, prior to signatures. After which, the National Fuels Management Specialist will work with appropriate regional staff to finalize the report for signature. Once finalized, signatures must include, ata minimum: 1) preparer(s), 2) the zone fire management officer (reviewed by), and3) appropriate level agency administrator (AADM) (approved by). Additional signatories maybe added as desired. Once signatures are obtained, the National Fuels Management Specialist will submit the final report tothe Wildland Fire Lessons Learned Center (LLC) after approved bythe Chief, Branch of Fire Management. The Branch of Fire Management will then notify regional fire management coordinators that itis available to facilitate additional learning. Regional directors will provide a written delegation of authority tothe regional fire management coordinator (RFMC) to represent the region onthe Geographic Multi-Agency Coordinating Group (GMAC) and perform other duties as described in this chapter under the heading “Delegation of Authority.” Regional Chief and Refuge Supervisors Regional chiefs and refuge supervisors are delegated specific leadership responsibilities bythe regional director. They provide oversight and direction, in coordination with, the Wildland Fire Management Program for the NWRS. These responsibilities occur through established lines of authority as assigned bythe regional director. Line Officer The line officer is responsible for the safe and efficient implementation of fire management activities within their unit, including cooperative activities with other agencies or landowners, in accordance with delegations of authorities. The line officer, or principal acting, will meet required elements outlined inthe Management Performance Requirements for Fire Operations table below. • The line officer will ensure a qualified AADM is assigned. • Hatchery programs with wildfire or prescribed fire potential will maintain AADM capability or ensure a delegation of authority toa neighboring AADM within their fire zone isin place. • Coastal and Partners for Fish and Wildlife programs follow 645 FW1 policy when FWS Fire Management supports cooperative agreements for prescribed fire implementation.
Management Performance Requirements for Fire Operations PERFORMANCE REQUIRED FWS Director Regional Director Regional Chief/ Refuge Supervisor Line Officer Policy 1. Ensure any standards developed are compliant with agency wildland fire policies. XX2. Ensure useof fire funds isin compliance with department and agency policies. XX3. Attends theM-581, Fire Program Management - an Overview course (offered atthe geographic level) orthe Agency Administrator Training Workshop hosted bythe National Interagency Prescribed Fire Training Center (NIPFTC) within two years of appointment. Ensures that personnel assigned oversight responsibilities for the fire program have completed theM-581 course. XX4. Review critical operations and safety policies and procedures, including Interagency Fire Program Management Qualifications Guide and Interagency Standards for Fire and Fire Aviation Operations with fire and fire aviation personnel. XXX Program Management 5. Provide a written delegation of authority to zone fire management officers (ZFMO) giving an adequate level of operational authority. For zoned/area units, ensure all appropriate AADMs have signed the delegation. When applicable, develop an inter-refuge agreement specifying reciprocal responsibilities ofthe line officer and the zone FMO. X6. Ensure all fire management activities are supported bya current fire management plan (FMP) with documented annual updates and are integrated with an approved comprehensive conservation plan. XXX7. Ensure investigations and reviews are conducted for incidents, accidents, escaped prescribed fires, and near misses as described in chapter 17of Fire Management Handbook and chapter 18of Interagency Standards for Fire and Fire Aviation Operations. XXXX 8. Annually update and review the FWS Line of Duty Death Response Handbook and the Agency Administrator’s Guide to Critical Incident Management, or equivalent. XXX9. Ensure master agreements with cooperators are valid andin compliance with agency policies and operating plans are current. XXX
PERFORMANCE REQUIRED FWS Director Regional Director Regional Chief/ Refuge Supervisor Line Officer 10. Ensure trespass actions are initiated and documented asper Chapter 10of the Service Fire Management Handbook. XXX11. Ensure Wildland Fire Decision Support System (WFDSS) is used to publish timely decisions andto provide decision support documentation for all fires that meet the criteria established in chapter 11. XXX12. In Alaska, provide written notification tothe: o Regional Chief of Refuges when Federal combined expenditures foran incident, ora complex of incidents, meet or exceed $5 million and more than 50% ofthe burned acres are managed bythe FWSo FWS Director, through the Regional Chief of Refuges, when Federal combined expenditures foran incident, ora complex of incidents, meet or exceed $10 million AND more than 50% ofthe burned acres are managed bythe FWS Notifications should be emailed with a copy tothe Branch of Wildland Fire Management Chief. XX13. Convene and participate in annual fire meetings. XX14. Participate as part ofin-briefings, IMT meetings, and post-fire closeouts, provide a written delegation of authority, and review and approve WFDSS decisions on extended attack fires. X15. Ensure fire and fire aviation preparedness reviews are conducted annually inall unit offices. Ensure timely follow-upto fire management program reviews. XX16. Ensure resource advisors are identified, trained, and available for incident assignment. Refer tothe Resource Advisor’s Guide for Wildland Fire, PMS 313. X17. Personally visit at least one wildfire or prescribed fire each year. X18. Ensure appropriate management of social/political/media resources and relationships affecting wildland fire. XXX
PERFORMANCE REQUIRED FWS Director Regional Director Regional Chief/ Refuge Supervisor Line Officer 19. Ensure smoke impacts tothe public and fire personnel are addressed through IMTs ordering of technical specialist - air resources advisors (THSP ARA) on type 1 fires tothe maximum extent practicable. Consider ordering ARAs on type 2 fire (Asper Public Law 116-9, the Dingell Act, 2019). X20. Provide oversight to emergency stabilization (ES) and burned area rehabilitation (BAR) processes and procedures. X Training/Certification 21. Ensure only trained and certified fire and non-fire personnel are available to support fire operations atthe local, geographic, and national levels. XXX22. Fire management leadership, local fire management leadership training and NIPFTC training will be tracked inthe Incident Qualifications and Certification System (IQCS). XX23. Serves as management official (MO) within the DOI Wildland Firefighter Medical Standards Program. XX Prescribed Fire/Fuels Management 24. Ensure compliance with national and regional policies for prescribed fire activities. Conduct periodic reviews ofthe prescribed fire program. XXX25. Ensure all wildfires resulting from prescribed fire actions are reported to regional director within 24 hours ofthe wildfire declaration. XX26. Ensure prescribed fire plans have been reviewed and recommended bya qualified technical reviewer other than the plan preparer. X27. Review and approve the Agency Administrator Ignition Authorization. X Fire Management Staff Roles National Office Fire Director The Fire Director isthe Chief ofthe Fire Management Branch inthe NWRS andis the Service representative atthe National Interagency Fire Center (NIFC). The Fire Director, through Service Manual 621FW 1, is delegated authority bythe Director to represent the Service onthe National Multi-agency Coordinating Group (NMAC). The Fire Director is responsible for implementing the decisions of NMAC as they affect FWS areas. The decisions of NMAC include the prioritizing of incidents nationally and the allocation or reallocation of firefighting resources to meet national priorities.
The Fire Management Branch is responsible for providing technical direction and coordination of fire management planning, policy development, and procedures servicewide. Regional Office Regional Fire Management Coordinator The regional fire management coordinator (RFMC) provides leadership, direction, coordination, training, planning, evaluation, and technical guidance for the region and provides assistance for intra-agency and interagency wildland fire management needs. The RFMC will meet qualification requirements established bythe Interagency Fire Program Management Qualifications Standards and Guide for the position. The RFMC, through written delegation bythe regional director, is delegated authority to represent the region on GMAC. The RFMC is responsible for implementing the decisions ofthe GMAC as they affect FWS. The decisions ofthe GMAC include the prioritizing of incidents, interagency master/statewide agreements and the allocation or reallocation of firefighting resources to meet wildland fire management priorities. Refuge Zone Fire Management Officer The zone FMO (ZFMO) is responsible and accountable for providing leadership for the fire management program. The ZFMO determines program requirements to implement land use decisions through the FMP to meet land management objectives. The ZFMO negotiates interagency agreements andas delegated, represents the AADM on local interagency fire and fire aviation groups. The ZFMO is responsible for coordinating with agency administrators to annually review and update (as required) their respective fire management plans to comply with agency policy. Fire Management Staff Performance Requirements for Fire Operations PERFORMANCE REQUIRED Fire Director RFMC Zone FMO Policy 1. Establishes and manages a safe, effective, and efficient fire program. XXX2. Ensures that FMPs reflect the agency’s commitment to firefighter and public safety while utilizing the full range of fire management activities available for ecosystem sustainability. XX3. Provides the expertise and skills to fully integrate fire and fire aviation management into interdisciplinary planning efforts. XXX4. Ensures fire and fire aviation policies are understood, implemented, and coordinated with other agencies as appropriate, including work/rest guidelines. XXX Program Management 5. Ensure appropriate risk management, administration, management, and oversight of wildland incidents. Ensure incident business analysts, strategic operational planners, resource advisors, and agency representative positions are utilized as needed. XXX6. Ensures completion ofa job hazard analysis (JHA)/risk assessment for fire and fire aviation activities to mitigate risk. XX7. Develop, negotiate, and implement cost share, Service First, and reimbursable protection agreements with cooperators. XXX8. Monitors fire suppression activities to recognize when complexity levels exceed current management capabilities. Increases managerial and operational resources to meet the need. XXX9. Ensures that agreements with cooperators and operational plans (e.g., operating plans, dispatch, preparedness, prevention) are valid andin compliance with agency policy. XXX10. Ensures useof fire funds isin compliance with DOI and agency policies. XXX11. Ensures that fire severity funding is requested, used, and documented in accordance with agency standards. XXX
PERFORMANCE REQUIRED Fire Director RFMC Zone FMO12. Ensures a process is established to communicate fire information to public, media, and cooperators. XXX13. Participates in annual fire meetings. XXX14. Oversees preseason preparedness review ofthe fire and fire aviation program. XX15. Initiates, conducts, and/or participates in fire program management reviews and investigations. XXX16. Personally participates in periodic site visits to individual incidents and projects. XX17. Ensures that transfer of command occurs asper Interagency Standards for Fire and Fire Aviation Operations, chapter 11. XX18. Ensure the proper level of management complexity is assigned toall incidents. XX19. Ensures that incoming personnel and crews are briefed prior to fire and fire aviation assignments. XX20. Ensures a WFDSS decision is initiated, approved, published, and updated as specified in chapter 11. XX21. Works with cooperators, groups, and individuals to develop and implement processes and procedures for providing fire safe communities within the wildland urban interface. XXX22. Ensures unit is capable of wildfire cause determination. XXX23. Annually updates and reviews the FWS Line of Duty Death Response Handbook and the Agency Administrator’s Guide to Critical Incident Management, or equivalent. XXX24. Ensures that fire season severity predictions, weather forecasts, fire behavior predictors, and fire activity levels are monitored and communicated (hard copy, webpage, email, radio, orfax) daily toall employees. XXX25. Uses current national, geographic, and local mobilization guides, and ensures standards are followed. XXX26. Ensures that reports and records are properly maintained according toFWS policies. XXX27. Ensures all job-related accidents/incidents resulting in, or having the potential to cause fatalities, injuries, illnesses, property or environmental damage are reported and/or investigated. All such reports are electronically submitted through the Safety Management Information System (SMIS), SAFENET, or SAFECOM as appropriate. XX28. Ensures that a current emergency medical response plan isin place and accessible. XX29. Ensures compliance with the DOI Wildland Firefighter Medical Standards process to include risk mitigation/waiver processes. XXX Planning 30. In coordination with regional office staff, lead development and/or update of FMPs and associated operating plans for approval by refuge management, regional fire and appropriate refuge staff. Annually review FMPs per Service policy. X31. Responsible for the coordination of remote automatic weather station (RAWS) maintenance, sensor calibration, and oversight of daily inputs. X
PERFORMANCE REQUIRED Fire Director RFMC Zone FMO Training 32. Ensures IQCS accounts are established, and training records are maintained for AADMs. XX33. Organizes trains, equips, and directs a qualified workforce. Ensures that only trained and qualified personnel are assigned to fire and fire aviation duties. Establishes and implements performance review process(es). XX Prescribed Fire and Fuels 34. Ensures compliance with Service, regional, and/or local policies for prescribed fire activities. Provides periodic reviews ofthe prescribed fire program. XXX35. Reports all prescribed fires that are declared wildfires tothe regional fire management coordinator as described in Chapter 17of the Fire Management Handbook. X36. Ensures a draft copy ofthe declared wildfire final report is submitted tothe agency’s National Fuels Management Specialist within 45 days ofthe fire being declared out, prior to signatures. X National Fire Leadership Team The National Fire Leadership Team (NFLT) is established under the guidance and support ofthe NWRS Leadership Team. The team is established to provide regional input on issues of national importance, to advise the Chief, Fire Management Branch, and provide leadership, coordination, and guidance inthe development and implementation ofa safe and effective fire management program within the Service. The team serves asa national clearing house, provides discussion of wildland fire management issues, and recommends actions to improve coordination and integration of regional fire management activities into national direction. The team will be responsible for the following: • Provide leadership, coordination, and guidance for the Wildland Fire Management Program. • Identify potential fire management issues and recommend strategies that will enhance the Service’s ability to safely and effectively manage fire on Service lands. • Develop and recommend common guidance and business rules as needed to manage fire management activities while recognizing individual regional needs. • Provide a forum for the exchange of ideas, best management practices, and lessons learned relating to Service fire management activities. • Provide a forum to discuss budget methodology applications that are consistent with appropriation language authority as well as providing for the collaboration and coordination within FWS and with our interagency partners. • Form task groups, working teams, or other collections of subject matter experts as needed to deal with specific tasks or long-term issues. These groups or teams will each have a leader who usually works inthe subject matter area with members assigned who may have the subject area asa collateral duty. They will have representation from across the Service and will provide guidance or operational recommendations tothe NFLT. Line Officer Team The line officer team (LOT) consists of representatives from each region and each level ofthe NWRS with primary responsibilities to advise and promote a safe, effective, and integrated fire management program inthe NWRS. Delegation of Authority Regional Fire Management Coordinator In order to effectively perform their duties, the regional director will delegate certain authorities tothe Regional Fire Management Coordinator (RFMC). This delegation is normally placed inthe regional office supplement to agency manuals. This delegation of authority should include: • Serve asthe regional director’s authorized representative on geographic area coordination groups, including MAC groups. • Coordinate and establish priorities on uncommitted fire suppression resources during periods of shortages.
• Coordinate logistics and suppression operations regionwide. • Relocate agency wildland fire resources within the region based on relative fire potential/activity. • Correct unsafe wildland fire activities. • Enter into agreements to provide for the management, fiscal, and operational functions of combined agency operated facilities. • Suspend prescribed fire activities when warranted. • Give authorization to hire emergency firefighters (EFF) in accordance with the DOI Administratively Determined (AD) Pay Plan for Emergency Workers. • Approve short-term fire severity funding expenditures notto exceed the region’s annual authority. Zone Fire Management Officer In order to effectively perform their duties, the zone fire management officer (ZFMO) will have the delegated authority outlining the operational and administrative fire management duties. All unit AADMs within a zone will sign a zone and/or refuge fire management delegation. A sample delegation of authority canbe found in appendix C. Inter-Refuge Agreements Inter-refuge agreements maybe used when ZFMOs provide fire management oversight to multiple refuges. This isin addition tothe delegation of authority from the project leaders/refuge managers tothe ZFMO and further defines the roles and expectations between the ZFMO and refuges. An example canbe found onthe FWS Fire Operations Policy and Guidance SharePoint site. Fire Duty Officer Fire management officers are responsible to provide fire duty officer (FDO) coverage during periods of predicted incident activities. FDO responsibilities maybe performed byany individual delegated the authority, either written or verbal, from the ZFMO. The duties for FDOs include: • Monitor unit incident activities for compliance with FWS safety policies. • Coordinate and set priorities for unit preparedness activities, incident response, and resource allocation. • Keep AADMs and resources informed ofthe current and expected situation. • Plan for and implement actions required for future needs. • Document decisions and actions. • FDOs will not fill Incident Command System (ICS) functions. Ifthe FDO needs to fulfil anICS function, they must reassign the FDO duties. Preparedness Reviews The Review and Update ofthe 1995 Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy (January 2001) states that “Agencies will ensure their capability to provide safe, cost-effective fire management programs in support of land and resource management plans through appropriate planning, staffing, training, equipment, and management oversight.” The USFWS Fire Management Program accomplishes this in part through the fire preparedness review process. Fire preparedness reviews assess fire programs for compliance with established fire policies and procedures as outlined inthe current Interagency Standards for Fire and Fire Aviation Operations and other pertinent policy documents. Reviews identify organizational, operational, procedural, personnel, or equipment deficiencies, and recommend specific corrective actions. USFWS Preparedness Review Schedules • Ata minimum, all zones will conduct and document a local level preparedness review annually. A template for documenting reviews is located onthe Branch of Fire Management SharePoint. Completed templates will be uploaded tothe Branch of Fire Management SharePoint. • Regional offices will conduct a preparedness review ofat least one zone annually. • The National Fire Operations and Safety Team (NFOST) will conduct at least one national-level review annually. Mobile Fire Equipment Policy All wildland fire management vehicles will: • Be uniquely identified inthe Financial and Business Management System (FBMS). • Fire Equipment Maintenance Procedure and Record (FEMPR) will be maintained for all wildland fire vehicles and will be used to document routine and annual inspections and maintenance. • Routine inspections will be performed and documented daily or prior to vehicle use.
• Annual inspections should be performed and logged at regularly scheduled intervals, butno less than onan annual basis, oras required by manufacturers’ schedules. Annual inspections will be performed bya qualified mechanic. • The FEMPR shall record the historic maintenance throughout the service life to help determine trends, repair frequency, and repair costs. • FEMPR review for all fire vehicles will be completed during local and regional reviews to ensure compliance with inspection requirements. The DOI Fire Equipment Improvement/ Deficiency Reporting System (IDRS) collects improvement suggestions and deficiency reports for all 600 Class fire equipment provided bythe National Fire Equipment Program (NFEP). The reporting system enables the NFEP to build a comprehensive database to document problems, identify trends, and establish priorities to develop and modify new and existing equipment. Operators will submit improvement/deficiency reports suggesting howto improve the safety, design, and efficiency of fire equipment, as well as deficiency reports to document irregular or potential problems with fire equipment. These reports are submitted tothe NFEP staff, where they receive immediate attention. Emergency Lighting and Sirens Fire staff may only use emergency lighting and sirens en route to incidents if their region hasan approved regional policy and their unit hasan approved refuge/unit emergency lighting and siren plan. • Use must be limited to imminent threat to life and public property. • All lighting and siren equipment installed on emergency vehicles must comply with NFPA 1901 and 1906 standards. • Regional policy must: ○ Address the training requirements in NFPA 1002 and 1451; ○ Establish oversight for emergency lighting and siren use; and ○ Not supersede State and local safety and traffic laws or regulations. Personnel must comply with posted speed limits atall times, regardless ofthe type of response. Useof stationary emergency lighting is encouraged and does not require authorization. Wildland Fire Field Attire Wildland fire field attire will be worn by primary, preparedness-funded personnel onall duty days during the predetermined “fire season” for the home unit in accordance with their approved step-up plan. Fire Severity Funding Service-specific fire severity funding guidance canbe found in chapter 10; Service Fire Management Handbook (chapter 10); and the Fire Business Guide, Severity Subactivity. Fire Reporting Field units will report wildland fire occurrence and fire status to their local dispatch office and regional fire management coordinator or designee. Individual Wildfire Report An individual wildfire report must be certified in InFORM Wildfire within 15 days after the fire is declared out. This includes: • All wildfires that burn on Service lands; • Fires suppressed on other lands under an agreement; • Natural outs (by natural out definition); and • AK: All false alarms. See FMH for further information. Reports are required regardless ofwho takes action, e.g., force account, cooperator, or contractor. When actions are taken ona cooperative fire, the agency having jurisdiction over the land on which the wildfire occurs will file a complete report to record and bill for assistance when necessary.
Fuels Treatment Effectiveness Monitoring FWS will complete a fuels treatment effectiveness assessment onall wildfires which start in, or burn into, a fuel treatment area. Enter results ofthe assessment into the Fuels Treatment Effectiveness Monitoring (FTEM) database within 90 days of control ofa fire. The FTEM database is located within the Interagency Fuels Treatment Decision Support System (IFTDSS). See additional information in chapter 17. Fish and Wildlife Service Useof the Wildland Fire Decision Support System FWS follows interagency policy regarding useof WFDSS. Standards for when WFDSS will be used are found in chapter 11. Useof WFDSS for wildfires beyond the minimum described in chapter 11is atthe discretion ofthe regional office or local unit. All fires in Alaska will have WFDSS initiated bythe protecting agency. Final Wildland Fire Record The final wildland fire or project record may include the following: • InFORM report certification (required) • Narrative • WFDSS analyses and decisions • Incident action plan(s) • Daily weather forecasts and spot weather forecasts • Daily fire progression map • Final perimeter for fires 10 acres and larger • Total cost summary • Monitoring data (wildland fire observation records) • Critique of fire projections on incident action plan • For Region 7 requirements, see Alaska Statewide Operating Plan Physical Fitness and Conditioning Employees serving in wildland fire positions that require a fitness rating of arduous asa condition of employment are authorized one hour of duty time each workday for physical fitness conditioning. Employees not having a fitness rating of arduous asa condition of employment, but who are required bya critical performance element or other written agreement to maintain an arduous level, will be authorized three hours per week of duty time for physical fitness conditioning. All other wildland firefighting personnel holding qualifications requiring ratings of moderate or arduous maybe authorized, by their supervisor, upto three hours per week of duty time for fitness conditioning. Prior toany duty time being allowed for physical fitness conditioning, employees and supervisors must agree, in writing, what physical conditioning activities the employee will engage in, and when and where they will occur. Activities outside ofthe agreement will notbe authorized or allowed. A combination of activities designed to increase both physical strength and aerobic fitness, while minimizing the possibility of physical injury, should be utilized. FWS National Fire Operations Fitness Challenge The FWS Fire Fitness Challenge (https://www.nifc.gov/about-us/our-partners/blm/training/fitness-challenge) encourages and recognizes achievement in physical fitness byFWS firefighters. The fitness challenge provides a common system by which FWS firefighters can measure current fitness, establish fitness goals, track fitness improvement, and receive recognition for their efforts. The fitness challenge is voluntary, but strongly encouraged. Nationally, the Branch of Fire Management will annually recognize individuals that demonstrate the most improvement and top over-all scores byage group and other factors. Training Agency Administrator Training The qualification standards identified inthe Interagency Fire Program Management Qualifications Standards and Guide are required, in conjunction with specific agency requirements, when filling vacant fire program positions, andas anaid in developing individual development plans (IDPs) for employees. • Refuge managers/project leaders with Service lands under their jurisdiction which require the development and maintenance ofa fire management plan must attend Fire Program Management, an Overview (M-581), ormay upon concurrence ofthe RFMC, attend the Prescribed Fire Workshop for Agency Administrators offered by NIPFTC.
• Projects leaders/refuge managers who oversee or have the potential to oversee complex fire management programs should consult with their RFMC about attending Fire Program Management, Leading Complex Fire Programs (M-582). • Field supervisors who may approve prescribed fire plans must attend Fire Program Management, an Overview (M-581), ormay upon concurrence ofthe RFMC, attend the Prescribed Fire Workshop for Agency Administrators offered bythe NIPFTC. • Agency Administrators who have the authority and responsibility to oversee prescribed fire implementation are required to attend RT-300on a biennial basis. The class must bea minimum of4 hours. Refer to memo FWS/ANRS/NRCP-FM/079978. • Regional chiefs, regional refuge supervisors, and refuge managers/project leaders must complete periodic refresher training as determined by their supervisor in consultation with the RFMC. Refresher training options may include attending fire management training/workshops, trainee experiences, or mentoring. • Guidance for use ofthe agency qualification for AADMs canbe found inthe Federal Wildland Fire Qualifications Supplement. Zone Fire Management Officer Training All ZFMOs are required to attend theM-581, Fire Program Management, an Overview course within one year of entry on duty. See Interagency Fire Program Management (IFPM) standards. FWS Firefighter General Training Requirements For firefighter qualification documentation guidance, reference chapter 13. Agency Permanent, Career Seasonal, and Temporary Firefighters Required Training Initial Requirement/ Frequency Completion/ Tracking Method Reference Hazardous Materials – First Responder Awareness Level • Upon initial employment • Annual refresher • Classroom or onsite • Employee personnel file 242FW 6, Hazardous Waste Operations and Emergency Response, OSHA 29CFR 1910.120(q)(6)(i); 1910.120(q)(8)(i-ii) Wildland Fire Safety Training Annual Refresher (RT-130) • Annually • Classroom • IQCS 621FW 1, Fire Management Program First Aid/ Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) • Upon initial employment • Every 2 years orper certifying authority • Classroom • Employee personnel file 240FW 3, Safety and Health Training Defensive Driving • Upon initial employment • Refresher every 3 years orper regional requirements, whichever if most restrictive • Employee personnel file 321FW 1, Authorization, Training and Safety Requirements Administratively Determined (AD) and EFF Required Training • First aid/CPR (every 2 years) • Defensive driving (every 3 years) Fish and Wildlife Service Specific Qualifications Guidance regarding agency-specific qualifications that are not contained inthe National Wildfire Coordinating Group (NWCG) Standards for Wildland Fire Position Qualifications, PMS 310-1, canbe found inthe Federal Wildland Fire Qualifications Supplement. For qualifications with agency standards which exceed minimums established inthe PMS 310-1, refer tothe Service Fire Management Handbook.
FWS Global Positioning System (GPS) Datum and Coordinate Format Standard To ensure safe and efficient suppression operations, all FWS fire resources will use the NWCG standard global position system (GPS) datum and latitude/longitude (coordinate) format when communicating GPS references. The standard datum is NAD83, and the standard coordinate format is Degrees Decimal Minutes (DDM). For other activities (e.g., mapping, fire reporting, planning), agency standards will apply.
Chapter 5 USDA Forest Service Program Organization and Responsibilities Introduction This document is intended tobe a program reference guide that documents the standards for operational procedures and practices for the USDA Forest Service Fire and Aviation Management Program. The standards provided in this document are based on current agency and interagency wildland fire management policy and are intended to provide fire and aviation program guidance andto ensure safe, consistent, efficient, and effective fire and aviation operations. This document will be reviewed and updated annually. Vision and Objectives for Fire Management The vision ofthe Forest Service’s Fire and Aviation Management Program isto safely and effectively extinguish fire, when needed; use fire where allowable; manage our natural resources; andas a nation, live with wildland fire. The following objectives support this vision: • Risk management and risk reduction – Assure management of risk to people, communities, and natural and cultural resources isthe fundamental principle used to make informed decisions inall fire management programs. Minimize the risk to people, communities, and natural and cultural resources by assessing the potential benefits of actions, severity of concerns, and probabilities of occurrences to reduce risk. • Ecological – Meet the Forest Service mission through the use of fire management programs to protect people and communities, conserve natural and cultural resources, and maintain and restore ecological health. • Collaboration – Implement the wildland fire management program through collaboration and partnerships. • Learning – Learn from science and ours and our partners’ experiences to improve fire management programs. • Empowerment – Employees are expected and empowered tobe creative and decisive, to exercise initiative, and accept responsibility and use their training, experience, and judgement to implement the agency’s mission. Foundational Doctrine The vision ofthe Forest Service’s Fire and Aviation Management Program isto usea doctrinal approach based on leadership, operations, and risk management. To support this vision, Forest Service policy isto: • Take all response actions to ensure the safety of firefighters, other personnel, and the public regardless of cost or resource loss; no resource or facility is worth the loss of human life. • The intent of wildfire response isto protect human life, property, and achieve protection and natural resource management objectives established inL/RMPs. • Leadership principles are the foundational doctrine (Leading inthe Wildland Fire Service, PMS 494-2, on which fire and aviation management operations will be based. A doctrinal approach goes beyond strict compliance with procedural rules and promotes risk-based application of wildland fire management principles to improve decision making and firefighter safety. Foundational doctrine has been codified in Forest Service Manual 5100 direction and will guide fundamental wildland fire management policy, practices, behaviors, and customs tobe mutually understood at every level of command. Under this doctrinal approach: • Employees are expected and empowered tobe creative and decisive, to exercise initiative and accept responsibility, andto use their training, experience, and judgment in decision-making to carry out their leader’s intent. • Employees are expected and empowered to make reasonable and prudent decisions to accomplish the agency mission while minimizing unnecessary risk. Mission • The Forest Service is prepared and organized to support national and international emergencies with trained personnel and other assets when requested. • Agency employees respond when they come across situations where human life is immediately at risk or there isa clear emergency, and they are capable of assisting without undue risk to themselves or others. • Support for local fire emergencies takes priority over accomplishment of local resource targets. Support ofnon- local fire emergencies will beat the discretion ofthe local line officer, as bounded by agency agreements and regional or national direction. • A cooperative relationship between the Forest Service and other agencies is essential. The Forest Service is committed to honor its part ofthe joint responsibility to develop and maintain effective working relationships with its intergovernmental cooperators.
Wildland Fire Response Principles • Response to wildland fire is based onthe ecological, social, and legal consequences of fire. The circumstances under which a fire occurs, and the likely consequences to firefighter and public safety and welfare, natural and cultural resources, and values tobe protected dictate the appropriate management response to fire. • Response to wildfire inthe wilderness focuses onthe natural ecological role of fire and activities are conducted ina manner compatible with overall wilderness management objectives (see FSM 2320). • Success is achieving reasonable objectives with the least firefighter risk necessary while enhancing stakeholder support for our management efforts. Leadership and Accountability • All levels of leadership must communicate a clear vision of agency goals and management principles, ensuring they are shared and understood byall levels ofthe organization. • All levels of leadership must express clear intent concerning roles and responsibilities to ensure wildfire response assignments are appropriate, risk-based, and effective. • Leaders regularly monitor operations for safety, efficiency, and effectiveness, and take action when there is recognition of exceptional or problematic employee performance. • Leaders and supervisors of Forest Service wildland firefighting resources will manage the health and wellbeing of employees by providing opportunities for time off, training, career development and work/life balance as needed and discussed with employees. The Operational Environment Risk Management The wildfire response environment is complex and possesses inherent hazards. Even with reasonable risk mitigations, responses can result in harm to firefighters. The Forest Service is committed tothe aggressive management of risk. • Apply a risk management process to minimize unnecessary risk in wildfire response while maximizing the opportunities to achieve management objectives. • Maintaining state-of-the-art decision support systems based onthe best available science is essential for making sound decisions onhow to manage all wildland fire to achieve land and resource management plan (L/RMP) objectives, including public and agency personnel safety. • The Forest Service Guide to Risk Management and other helpful risk management resources canbe found onthe USDA Forest Service Risk Management website (https://www.fs.usda.gov/managing-land/fire/safety). Operations Every wildfire response operation is directed toward clearly defined, decisive, and obtainable objectives. Wildfire Response • When itis time to engage a wildfire, doso ina manner that is appropriate, risk-based, and effective. • Command and control will be decentralized to cope with the unpredictable nature of wildfire. To achieve leader’s intent and accomplish operational objectives, subordinate commanders must make decisions on their own initiative and coordinate their efforts to maintain unity of effort. • Judgement in combination with principles and rules will guide wildfire response practices and actions. • Rapid deployment and appropriate concentration of wildfire response resources atthe decisive time and place are essential to successful wildfire response actions. • Maintaining a high capability to ensure effective initial attack is essential to public and firefighter safety, accomplishment of management objectives, and cost containment. • The interdependence of wildland fire jurisdictions requires the collaborative, proactive engagement of cooperators, partners, and the public in response activities. Risk Management Protocol Forest Service risk management protocol begins with working with partners and stakeholders to identify values affected (positively and negatively) by fire and then forming clear and reasonable objectives around these values. The highest value is human life, and thus the primary objective will always be protection of human life. Other objectives will be weighed against the amount of risk responders and the public must accept in order to accomplish the objectives as well asthe likelihood of success. The Forest Service is committed to using a three-phased risk management protocol:
I. Preseason Preseason preparedness work is critical to success when the fire starts. • Build decision maker and key stakeholder capacity to manage the uncertainties and inherent risks of fires. ○ Increase understanding of risk management with key stakeholders and partner agencies. ○ Build agency administrator capacity to perform as risk managers. • Determine what values-related spatial data is missing in Wildland Fire Decision Support System (WFDSS), ifany, and develop a plan for incorporating it into the unit’s fire planning map layers to ensure its availability to support future decisions. • Assess risk ata landscape level, looking at National Forest System (NFS) lands and those adjoining lands that maybe impacted bya fire leaving NFS land. ○ Develop a common understanding of values tobe protected by answering four questions: 1) What is important? 2) Whyis it important? 3) Whois it important to? and4) How important isit? ○ Complete a risk analysis with key stakeholders and partner agencies to predetermine the optimal response strategies for protecting values at risk. Engage key stakeholders and partner agencies in tabletop exercises or other venues to ensure alignment. ○ Initiate dialogue with line officers and stakeholders aimed at understanding, acceptance, and support for alternative risk-based decisions. This is especially important where there isan expectation that a fire will become a long-term event because ofan opportunity touse fire to achieve land management objectives, and/orthe need to adjust the level of engagement based on risks to responders, lack of available resources, and the level of risk toward values tobe protected. II. During Incident Phase During incident phase focuses ona seven-step risk management process: 1. Complete a Risk Complexity Assessment. ○ Develop an assessment of what isat risk (from preseason work, WFDSS values inventories, analytical tools and products, and/or input from key stakeholders), and the associated probabilities and potential consequences. 2. Complete a risk analysis. ○ Consider alternatives (objectives, strategies, and tactics) against desired outcomes, risks to human life (responders and the public), probability of success and values tobe protected. 3. Complete two-way risk communications. ○ Engage community leaders, local government officials, partners, and other key stakeholders ofthe incident to share the risk picture and enlist input. 4. Conduct risk-sharing dialogue. ○ Engage appropriate senior line officers and political appointees (as necessary) regarding the potential decision aimed at obtaining understanding, acceptance, and support for the alternatives and likely decision. 5. Make the risk-informed decision. 6. Document the risk through assessment, analysis, communication, sharing and decision in WFDSS. 7. Continue monitoring and adjusting as necessary oras conditions change. III. Post-Incident Phase Asa learning organization, we should always strive to improve howwe conduct our business. We should endeavor to learn from each incident and apply those lessons. • Complete an incident after action review. ○ Engage key stakeholders ofthe incident tobe involved. ○ Review what worked, what did not work, and suggestions for improvement. ○ Ifa WFDSS decision was necessary, evaluate decision quality and workflow and determine steps necessary to improve. • Conduct a peer review after action process. ○ Engage others who have had similar incidents to learn strategies for improvement. • Implement plans for improvement. ○ Make useof lessons learned in real time, if possible. The following risk assessment and risk decision questions are designed to inform fire management decisions by stimulating thinking and prompting dialogue, analyzing and assessing risk, recognizing shared risks, and communicating those risks within the agency and with partners and stakeholders. • Risk Assessment 1. What are the critical values at risk? 2. What isthe chance the critical values will be impacted; ifso, what are the consequences? 3. What are the opportunities to manage fire to meet land management objectives?
4. What are the possible low-probability/high-consequence events? 5. Who are the stakeholders that should be consulted prior to making a decision? • Risk Decision 1. What alternatives (objectives, strategies, and tactics) are being considered? 2. What isthe relative exposure of responders (exposure in terms of numbers of responders needed, amount of commitment (time/days) needed to accomplish the objectives, and the amount and types of risks these responders will be asked to accept ifthe alternative is chosen) for the alternatives being considered? 3. What isthe relative probability of success associated with the alternatives being considered? 4. What alternative provides for the best balance between the desired outcome and risk to responders? 5. What are the critical thresholds that will trigger reconsideration ofthe proposed alternative and how will they be monitored? Specific Line Officer Responsibilities for Fire and Aviation atthe Field Level The Forest Service has developed core fire management competencies for line officers with oversight responsibilities over fire management programs. • Knowledge of fire program management, including ability to integrate fire and fuels management across all program areas and functions; • Ability to implement fire management strategies and integrate natural resource concerns into collaborative community protection and ecosystem restoration strategies; • Knowledge to oversee a fire management program, including budget, preparedness, prevention, suppression, and hazardous fuels reduction; • Ability to serve asan agency administrator exercising authority to initiate prescribed fire and other hazardous fuel reduction activities; • Ability to serve asan agency administrator during an incident onan assigned unit; and • Ability to provide a fully staffed, highly qualified, and diversified firefighting workforce that exists ina “life first” and “readiness” environment. Responsibilities • Line officers are responsible for all aspects of fire management. • Integrate fire and fuels management across all functional areas. • Implement fire management strategies and integrate natural resource concerns into collaborative community protection and ecosystem restoration strategies onthe unit. • Manage a budget that includes fire preparedness, prevention, suppression, and hazardous fuels inan annual program of work for the unit. • Perform duties of agency administrator and maintain those qualifications. • Provide a fully staffed, highly qualified, and diverse workforce ina "safety first" environment. • Support and participate in wildfire prevention. • Ensure operational fire management responsibilities remain separated from agency administrator responsibilities in order to avoid collateral duty conflicts. These responsibilities are based on current policy and provide program guidance to ensure safe, consistent, efficient, and effective fire and aviation operations. Preparedness Preparedness isa continuous process that includes all fire management activities conducted in advance of wildfire ignitions to ensure an appropriate, risk-informed, and effective wildfire response to meet national and agency goals. • Take all necessary and prudent actions to ensure firefighter and public safety. • Ensure sufficient qualified fire and non-fire personnel are available to support fire operations ata level commensurate with the local and national fire situation. • Ensure accurate position descriptions are developed and reflect the complexity ofthe unit. Individual development plans (IDP) promote and enhance fire management officer (FMO) currency and development. • Provide a written delegation of authority to FMOs that provides an adequate level of operational authority atthe unit level. Include multi-agency coordinating (MAC) group authority, as appropriate. • Ensure the plans contained inthe Fire Management Reference System (FMRS) are based on resource objectives found inthe land and resource management plan (L/RMP). • Ensure budget requests and allocations reflect preparedness requirements from the program of work and support objectives from theL/RMP. • Develop preparedness standards that arein compliance with agency fire policies.
• Management teams meet once a year to review fire and aviation policies, roles, responsibilities, and delegations of authority. Specifically address oversight and management controls, critical safety issues, and high-risk situations, such as transfers of incident command, periods of multiple fire activity, and Red Flag Warnings. • Ensure fire and aviation preparedness reviews are conducted each year and include the key components ofthe Nationwide Aerial Application of Fire Retardant on National Forest System Lands Record of Decision. • Meet annually with cooperators and review interagency agreements to ensure their continued effectiveness and efficiency. • Coordinate annually with the Fish and Wildlife Service (at both the Field Office and Headquarters staff levels) to ensure that retardant avoidance areas on National Forest System Lands are mapped using the most up-to-date species information, such asany new detections and any other relevant data. Wildfire Response • Ensure useof fire funds isin compliance with agency policies. • The WFDSS will be used to develop, approve, and publish decisions onall fires. As appropriate, use analytical tools and products to inform and support decision-making. See chapter 11for the fire criteria that require a published decision. • Personally attend reviews on type 1and type 2 complexity fires. Ensure agency representatives are assigned and delegated authority when appropriate. • Provide incident management objectives, written delegations of authority, leader’s intent, anda complete agency administrator briefing to incident management teams (IMT). • Ensure briefings include information regarding aerial application of fire retardant and avoidance areas as described inthe current Implementation Guide. Include the reporting requirements inthe briefing ifan intrusion of fire chemical occurs. Provide resource advisors ifthe useof aerially applied fire retardant is expected and the unit has mapped avoidance areas (which include waterways and 300’ or larger buffers) and otherwise evaluate the need for resource advisors for all other fires and assign, as appropriate. • For all unplanned, human-caused fires where responsibility canbe determined, ensure actions are initiated to recover cost of suppression activities, land rehabilitation, damages tothe resource, and improvements. • Ensure structure exposure protection principles are followed (FSM 5135). • Ensure that a sufficient number of after action reviews are conducted for type 3, 4, and5 complexity wildfires to adequately assess the unit’s wildfire response capability, performance, procedures andto enhance learning. • Ensure smoke impacts tothe public and fire personnel are addressed by ensuring that Air Resource Advisors (ARA, technical specialist) are ordered to work as part of IMTs tothe maximum extent practicable for wildfires classified as having type 1 complexity inthe Organizational Assessment in WFDSS. Ensure assignment of ARAs as part of IMTs for type 2 complexity fires (asper Public Law 116-9, the Dingell Act, 2019, when appropriate to address smoke impacts.” Wildfire Response Responsibilities and Oversight • Agency administrators will ensure that all Forest Service employees and employees of interagency partners working on Forest Service jurisdiction wildfires clearly understand direction. • Agency administrators must approve and publish decisions in WFDSS ina timely manner and issue delegations of authority tothe incident commander (IC) in accordance with FSM 5133.3. • Analytical tools and/or products both within WFDSS and outside ofthe application should be used to inform and support strategic decision-making and risk assessment inputs. • Line officers will assign agency administrators to oversee incidents and approve WFDSS decisions based on qualification level according to incident type. Incident Complexity USFS AA Qualification Level to Approve WFDSS Decisions and Provide Incident Oversight1 Type 1 Wildfire Agency Administrator Type 1, WFA1 Type 2 Wildfire Agency Administrator Type 2, WFA2 Type 3, 4, 5 Wildfire Agency Administrator Type 3, WFA3 1Authority maybe retained atthe regional forester level. • Critical long duration wildfire oversight roles include ensuring that: ○ Up-to-date published decisions are completed and documented in WFDSS. ○ Hazards are identified and risk assessments are incorporated into published decisions. ○ Coordination with partners and potentially affected parties (including smoke impacts) is conducted; unified command is implemented early when appropriate.
○ Air resource advisors (ARA, technical specialist) are utilized on type 1 fires tothe maximum extent practicable and consideration of ordering for type 2 fires (asper Public Law 116-9, the Dingell Act, 2019). ○ Resource capacity and availability are adequately assessed to meet expectations. • This oversight role should address concerns ofthe States, cooperators, and the public, including air quality impacts from multiple wildfires. Useof Wildfire to Achieve Land Management Objectives During Preparedness Levels 4and 5 • Wildfire response decisions that include objectives to improve or enhance natural resources must be approved bythe Regional Forester at Geographic and/or National Preparedness Levels 4and 5. Approving officials should consider relative risks vs gains, organizational needs to adequately staff the incident, the duration of those resource commitments, and the extents to which the planned response might addto or relieve the strain on resource availability nationally. Human-caused fires are not eligible for such consideration. Only naturally occurring wildfires in areas where the Land and Resource Management Plan has determined that fire does play a role in managing natural systems are eligible for such consideration. • The Regional Forester or designee will assume the role ofthe deciding official for the decision inthe WFDSS. This requirement does not apply to long-duration events that are not in pursuit of natural resource objectives such as those instances where itis too dangerous for responders or there are insufficient resources available to mount an effective response, anda long-term control strategy is adopted outof managerial necessity rather than preference. • Tothe extent practical, regions and forests should adopt pre-ignition practices and systems for determining relative risks and opportunities including the short-term (this year) and long-term (future years) implications of these decisions in such away asto facilitate a meaningful yet timely discussion with the Regional Foresters office shortly after candidate fires are detected. Safety • Review safety policies, procedures, and concerns with field fire and aviation personnel. • Ensure timely follow-up actions to program reviews, fire preparedness reviews, fire and aviation safety reviews, and management reviews. • Monitor the fire situation and provide oversight during periods of critical fire activity and situations of high risk. • Ensure there is adequate direction in fire management plans to maintain fire danger awareness. • Take appropriate actions with escalating fire potential. • Ensure appropriate investigation or lessons learned analyses are conducted for incidents, entrapments, and serious accidents. See FSM 6730. Fuels • Plan and implement a hazardous fuels management and prescribed fire program applying principles and policy elements described inFSM 5100 and 5140 (https://www.fs.usda.gov/cgi-bin/Directives/get_dirs/fsm?5100) and guided bythe goals described inthe National Cohesive Wildland Fire Strategy. • Complete a fuels treatment effectiveness assessment onall wildfires which start inor burn into a fuel treatment area. • Enter results ofthe assessment into the Fuels Treatment Effectiveness Monitoring (FTEM) database within 90 days of control ofa fire. The FTEM database is located within the Interagency Fuels Treatment Decision Support System (IFTDSS). Links to optional reporting templates and other information related tothe FTEM reporting requirement canbe found onthe FAM website. • Use the IFTDSS to assist with fuels planning, prescribed burn development, risk analysis, etc. Prescribed Fire • Provide program leadership by visiting prescribed fire treatment projects and providing leader’s intent to prescribed fire personnel. • Ensure compliance with national and regional office policy and direction for prescribed fire activities and ensure that periodic reviews and inspections ofthe prescribed fire program are completed. • Coordinate prescribed fire program activities with regional air quality specialists and Federal, State, Tribal, air pollution control district or county regulatory authorities to ensure compliance with their regulations supported bythe Clean Air Act. • When multiple wildland fire events are occurring within an airshed, orany airshed is impacted by ongoing wildland fire events, fire managers will consider the cumulative impact toair quality. Initiation ofnew prescribed fire must bein compliance with air quality regulations and standards. • All prescribed fires should be conducted using basic smoke management practices. USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service and Forest Service Technical Note (2011, https://www.nrcs.usda.gov/conservation- basics/natural-resource-concerns/air).
• Ensure a prescribed fire plan is written and approved for each project prior to implementation in accordance with the NWCG Standards for Prescribed Fire Planning and Implementation, PMS 484. • Review and approve prescribed fire plans and ignitions. ○ Engage inthe development ofthe complexity analysis; review and approve the final complexity rating. ○ Ensure that the prescribed fire plan has been reviewed and recommended bya qualified technical reviewer. ○ Ensure that prescribed fire plans are designed to achieve desired conditions as described inL/RMPs and project-specific NEPA decision documents. ○ Approve prescribed fire plan amendments and determine the need for additional technical review of proposed plan amendments prior to approval. ○ If more than one year has elapsed since a prescribed fire plan was last approved, the plan will be reviewed, updated as necessary, andre-approved before implementation. ○ Authorize ignition of prescribed fire as delegated and adhere to procedures as described inFSM 5140 for regional- and/or national-level approvals for initiation ofnew and continued prescribed fire activities at national preparedness levels 4and 5or when forecast National Fire Danger Rating System (NFDRS) adjective ratings areat “extreme” category. • Use analytical tools, such as IFTDSS (Interagency Fuels Treatment Decision Support System), to assist with treatment options, fire behavior potential, prescribed burning prescriptions, and values at risk to help inform fuels planning efforts and implementation options. • Report all instances of prescribed fires resulting ina wildfire declaration and/orair quality notice-of-violation as required inFSM 5140. Agency Administrator Training and Qualifications for Wildland Fire Management There are six separate and distinct qualifications for agency administrators related to fire management—three for wildfire decision making and three for prescribed fire. The training and experience requirements and certification process for both wildfire and prescribed fire are described below. Agency Administrator Core Competencies Core competencies that must be demonstrated by agency administrators exercising decision-making authority for wildfires or prescribed fires include: • Risk-informed decision-making • Wildfire response and incident management processes • WFDSS/IFTDSS and other decision support tools • Fuels management and prescribed fire processes • Fire prevention, mitigation, and education processes • Social, political, economic, and environmental impacts of wildland and prescribed fire management activities • Collaboration with partners and stakeholders • Fiscal management These core competencies form the basis for the agency administrator position task book which is used to document that an individual has indeed demonstrated these competencies while working toward certification. For access tothe position task book, Wildfire Pathways Diagram, and additional information onthe Forest Service agency administrator fire qualification programs, visit the Agency Administrator Toolbox. Definitions Agency administrator (AA): A general term meaning the official with the delegated authority, responsibility, and qualifications for decision-making on incidents or prescribed fires within a particular administrative unit. Agency representative (AREP): The AREP facilitates coordination, cooperation, and dialogue between the incident management team (IMT) and host agency administrator (AA). The AREP is delegated bythe host unit AAor designee and works with the command functional area. Agency administrator trainee: AnAA working on qualification atany given level by performing the role under the supervision and authority ofa fully qualified AA. Coach: AnAA qualified ata level commensurate with the incident or project being managed (e.g., WFA2 or WFA1 for wildfire and RXA2 or RXA1 for prescribed fire). The role ofthe coach isto advise and support the agency administrator trainee through various aspects ofa wildfire incident, prescribed fire, orall-hazards incident.
Incident or Project Complexity Minimum Qualification Level to Serve as Agency Administrator Coach/Evaluator Wildfire – Type 1 Wildfire Agency Administrator Type 1, WFA1 Wildfire – Type 2 Wildfire Agency Administrator Type 2, WFA2 Wildfire – Type 3, 4, 5 Wildfire Agency Administrator Type 3, WFA3 Prescribed Fire – High Complexity Prescribed Fire Agency Administrator Type 1, RXA1 Prescribed Fire – Moderate Complexity Prescribed Fire Agency Administrator Type 2, RXA2 Prescribed Fire – Low Complexity Prescribed Fire Agency Administrator Type 3, RXA3 Line officer: A Forest Service official who serves ina direct line of command from the chief and has been delegated authority to make and execute decisions for their administrative unit(s). Examples are the deputy chiefs, director oflaw enforcement and investigations, regional foresters, station directors, forest supervisors, deputy forest supervisors, district rangers, and deputy district rangers. Line officers have authority to issue direction within delegated levels. Agency Administrator Wildfire Qualification Program The following principles will guide qualification ofAAs in wildfire management: • Regional foresters are accountable for certification ofAA qualifications bya review process established by regional forester, such as regional line officer team; • AA evaluation includes standards for training, background and experience, demonstrated ability, and utilizing the position task book and Wildfire Pathways Diagram which will result ina qualitative evaluation of readiness bythe regional forester; • When the complexity level ofa wildfire exceeds anAA’s qualification, a qualified coach will be assigned; • Care should be taken when assigning acting AAsto ensure operational fire management responsibilities remain separated from AA responsibilities in order to avoid collateral-duty conflicts. Consider delegating authority in writing to ensure expectations and responsibilities are clearly delineated; • Agency administrator competencies (aka, qualification level) supersedes position (e.g., a district ranger qualified asa WFA1 maybe theAA fora type 1 incident); • Assistance with decision documentation and analysis canbe requested through the Wildland Fire Management Research, Development and Application – National Fire Decision Support Center (NFDSC); and • The coaching/training functions, tobe administered by each region, isan integral part of this qualification program. AAs will be evaluated in three basic areas: • Training; • Experience; and • Demonstrated understanding of concepts and principles as outlined inthe position task book. This qualification program isa multi-level process where AAs demonstrate competence inone of three levels of managing wildfires: WFA3, WFA2, and WFA1. Guidelines In consideration ofthe appropriate level (WFA3, WFA2, and WFA1) to assign anAA, the regional forester should consider the following guideline: • For individuals that donot meet at least the working level, a coach will be assigned to support that agency administrator in managing type 3or higher complexity wildfire incidents. Wildfire Agency Administrator Type 3 (WFA3) The WFA3 could manage a type 3, 4or 5 wildfire or similar complexity incident. The WFA3 must meet the following in order tobe certified atthe working level: • Required training and experience: Refer tothe Federal Wildland Fire Qualifications Supplement. • Other background, experience, and training that supports: ○ Applicable experience in prescribed fire, wildfire, all-hazards, or other incident oversight may also be considered in addition to other guidelines. ○ Management oversight ofa moderate-high complexity fire program as defined by Interagency Fire Program Management (IFPM) standards. • Demonstrated ability: Successful evaluation bya coach (including feedback from ICor area commanders [AC]) and Regional Line Officer Team and subsequent certification bythe Regional Forester that the candidate has demonstrated understanding and application ofthe responsibilities ofan WFA3 trainee. Use the WFA3 position task book to document.
Wildfire Agency Administrator Type 2 (WFA2) The WFA2 could manage type 2or lower complexity fires or similar incidents. • Required training and experience: Refer tothe Federal Wildland Fire Qualifications Supplement. • Other background, experience, and training that supports: ○ Applicable experience in prescribed fire, wildfire, all-hazards, or other incident oversight may also be considered in addition to other guidelines. ○ Management oversight ofa moderate-high complexity fire program as defined by IFPM standards. • Demonstrated ability: Successful evaluation bya coach (including feedback from ICsor ACs) that the candidate has demonstrated understanding and application ofthe responsibilities ofan WFA2. Use the WFA2 position task book to document. Wildfire Agency Administrator Type 1 (WFA1) The WFA1 could manage oneor more type 1 wildfire or similar complexity incidents. • Required training and experience: Refer tothe Federal Wildland Fire Qualifications Supplement. • Other background, experience, and training that supports: ○ Applicable experience in prescribed fire, wildfire, all-hazards, or other incident oversight may also be considered in addition to other guidelines. ○ Management oversight ofa moderate to high-complexity fire program as defined by IFPM standards. • Demonstrated ability: Successful evaluation bya coach (including feedback from ICsor ACs) and Regional Line Officer Team and subsequent certification bythe Regional Forester that the candidate has demonstrated understanding and application ofthe responsibilities ofan WFA1 on large complex fires. Use the WFA1 position task book to document. Evaluation Process • Every trainee will receive an evaluation from a qualified AA/AREP or coach using theAA position task book identified inthe Line Officer/Agency Administrator Desk Reference for Fire Program Management. • Individuals involved ina shadow assignment should receive creditable experience through documentation. • The purpose ofthe position task book isto provide consistency for the AA coach/evaluator to evaluate trainees and document their demonstrated abilities to achieve the core competencies, which will be used asa component to achieve next-level qualification. • Every trainee will complete a position task book for evaluation from anAA. Training opportunities and work experiences to achieve and maintain core competencies: • Refer tothe Wildfire Pathways Diagram found inthe Agency Administrator Toolbox. Currency The requirement to perform satisfactorily ina specified position within the last five years in order to maintain qualification for the position. Certifying Official The certifying official for all Agency Administrator qualifications will beat the Regional Forester level and shall notbe delegated to Forest Supervisors or Regional Fire Directors. Incident Qualification Card Incident qualification cards for any responder with Agency Administrator qualifications will be signed bythe Regional Forester and shall notbe delegated to Forest Supervisors or Regional Fire Directors regardless of other qualifications. An electronic incident qualification card utilizing the IQCS portable document format (PDF) is authorized. Agency Administrator Prescribed Fire Qualification The following principles will guide qualification ofAAs for prescribed fire: • Regional foresters are accountable for annual certification ofAAs to approve and authorize prescribed fire. • AA evaluation includes standards for training, background and experience, and demonstrated ability, which will result ina qualitative evaluation of readiness bythe regional forester. • When the complexity level ofa prescribed fire exceeds anAA’s qualification, an appropriately qualified AA will be assigned and must approve the complexity analysis and the burn plan along with theAA being mentored/coached. • The authorization to ignite a prescribed fire must be approved byan appropriately qualified AA; however, the line officer with authority over their assigned unit will also retain authority to prohibit the ignition based on their judgement regardless of their qualification level.
• Care should be taken when assigning acting AAsto ensure operational fire management responsibilities remain separate from agency administrator responsibilities in order to avoid collateral-duty conflicts. • The coach/shadow functions, tobe administered by each region, isan integral part of this qualification program. AAs will be evaluated in three basic areas: • Training; • Experience; and • Demonstrated understanding of concepts and principles. This qualification program isa multi-level process where AAs demonstrate competence inone of three levels of prescribed fire qualifications: RXA3, RXA2, RXA1. Guidelines In consideration ofthe appropriate qualification level (low, moderate, or high) to certify qualifications ofan AA, the regional forester should consider the following guidelines: Prescribed Fire Agency Administrator Type 3 (RXA3) The RXA3 can review, approve, authorize, and provide oversight for the management oflow-complexity prescribed fires. The RXA3 trainee must meet the following in order tobe qualified asan RXA3: • Required training and experience: Refer tothe Federal Wildland Fire Qualifications Supplement. • Other background, experience, and training that supports: ○ Applicable experience in prescribed fire, wildfire, all-hazards, or other incident or project oversight may also be considered in addition to other guidelines. ○ Management oversight ofa low-complexity fire program. • Demonstrated ability: Successful evaluation bya coach (including feedback from FMO/fire staff/director) that the candidate has demonstrated understanding and application ofthe responsibilities ofan RXA3 on smaller, low-complexity prescribed fires with a basic understanding ofthe elements ofthe core competencies. Use the RXA3 position task book to document. Prescribed Fire Agency Administrator Type 2 (RXA2) The RXA2 can review, approve, authorize, and provide oversight for the management of moderate-complexity prescribed fires. • Required training and experience: Refer tothe Federal Wildland Fire Qualifications Supplement. • Other background, experience, and training that supports: ○ Applicable experience in wildfire, all-hazards, or other incident oversight may also be considered in lieu of other guidelines. ○ Management oversight ofa moderately-complex prescribed fire program, providing fora workforce with appropriate training and equipment, NEPA compliance and project planning, social/political considerations, smoke management, public information, etc. • Demonstrated ability: Successful evaluation bya supervisor or coach (including feedback from FMO/fire staff/director) that the candidate has demonstrated understanding and application ofthe responsibilities ofan RXA2 on moderate-complexity prescribed fires with an understanding ofthe core competencies and other elements that maybe relevant. Use the RXA2 position task book to document. Prescribed Fire Agency Administrator Type 1 (RXA1) The RXA1 can review, approve, authorize, and provide oversight for the management of high-complexity prescribed fires. • Required training and experience: Refer tothe Federal Wildland Fire Qualifications Supplement. • Other background, experience, and training that supports: ○ Applicable experience in prescribed fire, wildfire, all-hazards, or other incident oversight may also be considered in lieu of other guidelines. ○ Management oversight ofa moderate- to high-complexity prescribed fire program, providing fora workforce with appropriate training and equipment, NEPA compliance and project planning, social/political considerations, smoke management, public information, etc. • Demonstrated ability: Successful evaluation byan RXA1 or coach (including feedback from FMO/fire staff/director) that the candidate has demonstrated understanding and application ofthe responsibilities ofan RXA1 on large complex fires inthe core competencies, and other elements that maybe relevant. Use the agency administrator position task book to document.
Evaluation Process • Every trainee will receive an evaluation from a qualified AAor coach using theAA position task book. • Refer tothe Prescribed Fire Pathways diagram found inthe Agency Administrator Toolbox. Training opportunities to achieve and maintain core competencies: • Upper levels of fire leadership and fire management courses; • Function asthe agency administrator during sand table exercises and training simulations; • Participate in prescribed fire and fire management training, such asRX-410 and RX-510; • Actas a member or leader fora team assigned to review a declared wildfire or violation ofair quality standards; • Attendance/participation in Prescribed Fire Burn Boss Refresher training, RT-300; • Participate in prescribed fires and/or attend prescribed fire training; and • Participate in other leadership and/or decision-making training. Currency The requirement to perform satisfactorily ina specified position within the last five years in order to maintain qualification for the position. Certifying Officials The certifying official for all Agency Administrator qualifications will beat the Regional Forester level and shall notbe delegated to Forest Supervisors or Regional Fire Directors. Incident Qualification Card Incident qualification cards for any responder with Agency Administrator qualifications will be signed bythe Regional Forester and shall notbe delegated to Forest Supervisors or Regional Fire Directors regardless if they have other qualifications ornot. An electronic incident qualification card utilizing the IQCS portable document format (PDF) is authorized. Specific Fire Management Staff Responsibilities for Fire Operations atthe Field Level Preparedness • Use sound risk management practices asthe foundation for all aspects of fire and aviation management. • Ensure that only trained and qualified personnel are assigned to fire and aviation duties. • Develop, implement, evaluate, and document fire and aviation training program to meet current and anticipated needs. • Establish an effective process to gather, evaluate, and communicate information to managers, supervisors, and employees. Ensure clear, concise communications are maintained atall levels. • Ensure fire and aviation management staffs understand their roles, responsibilities, authority, and accountability. • Develop and maintain effective communication with the public and cooperators. • Regardless of funding level, provide a safe, effective, and efficient fire management program. • Organize, train, equip, and direct a qualified workforce. An individual development plan (IDP) must be provided for incumbents whodo not meet new standards. Establish qualification review process. • Take appropriate action when performance is exceptional or deficient. • Ensure fire and aviation policies are understood, followed, and coordinated with other agencies as appropriate. • Ensure that adequate resources are available to implement fire management operations. • Provide fire personnel with adequate guidance, training, and decision-making authority to ensure timely decisions. • Develop and maintain agreements, operating plans, and contracts onan interagency basis to increase effectiveness and efficiencies. • Develop, maintain, and annually evaluate both the FMRS and spatial fire planning in WFDSS to ensure accuracy and validity. • Ensure budget requests and allocations reflect preparedness requirements from the program of work and support objectives from theL/RMP. • Develop and maintain current operational plans (e.g., dispatch, preattack, prevention). • Ensure that reports and records are properly completed and maintained. • Ensure fiscal responsibility and accountability in planning and expenditures. • Assess, identify, and implement program actions that effectively reduce unwanted wildland fire ignitions and mitigate risks to life, property, and resources. • Work with cooperators to identify processes and procedures for providing fire-adapted communities within the wildland urban interface.
Wildfire Response • Provide for and personally participate in periodic site visits to individual incidents and projects. • Utilize the Risk Complexity Assessment to ensure the proper level of management is assigned toall incidents. • Ensure incoming personnel and crews are briefed prior to fire and aviation assignments. • Coordinate the development of published decisions within WFDSS with local unit staff specialists for all fires that escape initial attack. • Ensure effective transfer of command of incident management occurs and safety is considered inall functional areas. • Monitor fire activity to anticipate and recognize when complexity levels exceed program capabilities. Increase managerial and operational resources to meet needs. • Complete cost recovery actions when unplanned human-caused fires occur. • Ensure structure exposure protection principles are followed. • Ensure all intrusions of wildland fire chemicals are reported and appropriate consultation conducted as needed (see chapter 12). • Ensure all assessments of impacts to threatened and endangered species or cultural resources are conducted by trained and qualified resource personnel. Safety • Ensure completion ofa job hazard analysis (JHA) or risk assessment (RA) for fire and fire aviation activities and implement applicable risk mitigation measures. • Ensure work/rest and length-of-assignment guidelines are followed during all fire and aviation activities. Deviations are approved and documented. • Initiate, conduct, and/or participate in fire-management-related reviews and investigations. • Monitor fire season severity predictions, fire behavior, and fire activity levels. Take appropriate actions to ensure safe, efficient, and effective operations. Prescribed Fire • Ensure a written, approved burn plan exists for each prescribed fire project. • Prepare and implement all prescribed fire plans in accordance with the NWCG Standards for Prescribed Fire Planning and Implementation, PMS 484. • Ensure that the prescribed fire burn boss assigned to each project is qualified atthe appropriate level as determined by project complexity (see the NWCG Standards for Prescribed Fire Planning and Implementation). • Responsibility for prescribed fires in patrol/mop-up status maybe assigned tothe unit duty officer (see below) until declared “out.” The duty officer (DO) may assign either a burn boss orIC ata level commensurate with expected activities to coordinate onsite actions (e.g., ICT5 for one engine to patrol). Inthe event that elements ofthe burn plan other than patrol/mop-up (e.g., holding or contingency) become necessary, then an appropriately qualified burn boss will be assigned to continue implementation ofthe approved burn plan. • Review and update all prescribed fire plans as necessary to comply with policy or procedures and submit to agency administrator for review and approval. • Submit amendments to prescribed fire plans tothe agency administrator for approval. • If more than one year has elapsed since approval, a prescribed fire plan will be reviewed to ensure assumptions are still valid and conditions have not changed, updated as necessary, and resubmitted tothe agency administrator for approval. Fire and Aviation Management Duty Officer Each forest or grassland fire management officer or assistant fire management officer will perform the duties ofa Fire and Aviation (FAM) duty officer (DO) for their unit, or will provide a delegated DO, during any periods of predicted or actual incident activity. Individuals performing asDO must have the approval ofthe unit’s agency administrator and meet the minimum NWCG qualifications as identified inthe Forest Service Fire and Aviation Qualifications Guide (FSFAQG), chapter 4. The required duties for all DOs are: • Serve asthe unit’s primary contact with dispatch for both onand off-unit assignments. • Monitor unit incident activity for compliance with Forest Service risk management practices. • Coordinate and set priorities for unit suppression actions and resource allocation. • Keep agency administrators, suppression resources, and information officers informed ofthe current and expected situation. • Plan for and implement actions required for future needs. • Document key decisions and actions.
DOs will perform the above duties in addition toany unit specific duties assigned bythe unit’s agency administrators or fire managers through a delegation of authority or unit operating plan. Inthe event that theDO is required to accept an incident assignment, the outgoing DO must transition with another qualified and approved DO. Useof district/zone DOsis intended to manage span of control. When assigned tothe DO role, DOs will not concurrently perform any Incident Command System (ICS) command or operational functions directly connected toan incident. DO staffing levels may vary based on locally determined metrics, such as fire danger, local area planning level, predicted incident activity, prescribed fire implementation, and/or span of control. Fire Management Position Requirements The Interagency Fire Program Management Qualifications Standards and Guide and Forest Service Fire Program Management Standard (FS-FPM) will be used in conjunction with specific agency requirements when filling vacant fire program positions andas anaid in developing individual development plans (IDPs) for employees. Structure Exposure Protection Principles Mission and Role A significant role ofthe Forest Service isto manage natural resources on public land; management of wildfire isa primary mission in that role. Wildland firefighter training, tools, and personal protective equipment are based onthe wildland environment. This does not prevent using wildland tactics inthe wildland urban interface (WUI) when risks are mitigated. Wildland firefighter training for the WUI, however, is centered onthe concepts of preventing wildfire from reaching areas of structures and/or reducing the intensity of fire that does reach structures. Fire suppression actions on structures that are outside Federal jurisdiction, outside the scope of wildland firefighting training, or beyond the capability of wildland firefighting resources are not appropriate roles for the Forest Service. Forest Service leadership will express clear and concise leader’s intent to ensure structure protection assignments are managed safely, effectively, and efficiently. Leaders are expected to operate under existing policies and doctrine under normal conditions. Where conflicts occur, employees will be expected to weigh the risk versus gain and operate within the intent of agency policy and doctrine. Strategic Principles • The Forest Service actively supports creation of Firewise and fire-adapted communities and structures that can survive wildfire without intervention. We support the concept that property owners have primary responsibility for reducing wildfire risks to their lands and assets. • The Forest Service will actively work toward applying Firewise concepts toall Forest-Service-owned structures, facilities, and permitted useto serve asa model to publics and communities. • The Forest Service will apply strategy and tactics to keep wildfires from reaching structures, as prudent todo so, considering risk to firefighters and publics, fire behavior, values at risk including natural resources, availability of firefighting resources, and jurisdictional authorities. • The use of wildland tactics inthe WUI, when risks are mitigated, will be based onthe objectives of preventing wildfire from reaching areas of structures and/or reducing the intensity of fire that does reach structures. • Structure protection will be limited tothe useof standard wildfire response tactics, including the use of standard equipment, fire control lines, and the extinguishment of spot fires near oron the structure when safe and practical. • The Forest Service will be proactive in developing agreements with interagency partners to clarify its structure protection policy. • The Forest Service structure protection role is based onthe assumption that other departments and agencies will fulfill their primary roles and responsibilities. The Forest Service will not usurp individual, local, or State responsibility for structure protection. • Prior to task implementation, a specific structure protection role briefing will be accomplished. Tactical Applications Structure Protection Definition Actions taken in advance ofa fire reaching structures or other improvements are intended to safely prevent the fire from damaging or destroying these values at risk. For the Forest Service, structure protection involves the use of standard wildland fire suppression tactics and control methods, including the use of standard equipment, fire control lines, and the extinguishing of spot fires near oron the structure when safe and practical.
USFS Role As documented ina Forest Service doctrinal principle, “Agency employees respond when they come across situations where human life is immediately at risk or there isa clear emergency, and they are capable of assisting without undue risk to themselves or others.” This principle serves asa foundational basis for the roles employees play in structure protection. Pursuant to this “structure protection” policy provided above, Forest Service personnel may engage support from other cooperators in structure protection activities when 1) requested by local government under terms ofan approved cooperative agreement or2) when operating within a unified command. The agency is permitted, without agreement, to render emergency assistance toa local government in suppressing wildland fires, andin preserving life and property from the threat of fire, when properly trained and equipped agency resources are the closest tothe need, and there is adequate leadership todo so safely. The agency will not routinely provide primary emergency response (medical aids, fire suppression, HAZMAT, etc., as identified on “run cards” or preplanned dispatch scenarios) nor will the agency supplant the local government responsibility todo so. The contents ofa cooperative agreement will clearly define the responsibilities of partners. Regarding structural fire protection, typical Forest Service responsibilities inthe case of mutual aid, initial attack, extended attack, or large fire support include: • To provide initial attack through extended-attack actions consistent with application of wildland fire strategy and tactics. • To supply water in support of Tribal, State, or local agencies having jurisdictional responsibility for the fire. This would include the use of water tenders, portable pumps, hose, tanks, and supporting draft sites. • To assist or supply foam or chemical suppressant capability with engines or aerial application. • To assist local authorities inthe event of evacuations. • To assist local authorities by assessing (triaging) structures for defensibility from wildfire. • To coordinate with local authorities on actions taken by private structure protection companies. As such, there should notbe an expectation that the Forest Service will: • “Wrap” orset upand administer sprinklers around privately owned structures. • Remove fuels immediately surrounding a structure, such as brush, landscaping, or firewood. As addressed above, the Forest Service will apply strategy and tactics to keep wildfires from reaching structures, as prudent todo so, considering risk management for firefighters and publics, fire behavior, values at risk including natural resources, availability of firefighting resources, and jurisdictional authorities. The Forest Service shall not: • Take direct suppression actions on structures other than those that tactically reduce the threat of fire spread to them. • Enter structures or work on roofs of structures for the purpose of direct suppression actions. In consideration of Forest-Service-owned or leased structures outside of structure fire protection areas these same policies apply. The use of Firewise principles and aggressive fire prevention measures will be employed for Forest Service structures at every opportunity. Ifa Forest Service structure is determined tobe at risk, “wrapping” or other indirect protection methods for the structure canbe authorized bythe agency administrator. Documentation of these decisions needs tobe placed inthe fire documentation package and the unit files. Any employee engaged in “wrapping” or other indirect methods of protection operations will be thoroughly briefed and trained in correct safety and personal protection equipment procedures, especially ifthe useof ladders or climbing onthe structure is necessary. Inany case, the Forest Service holds that no structure is worth the risk of serious injury toan employee inan attempt to protect that structure or facility from fire. Local Government Role Local government has the responsibility for emergency response, including structure protection, within their jurisdiction. This responsibility is usually found within the fire agencies’ charter andis substantiated bytax dollar revenue (sales and/or property tax). Cost Local governments assume the financial responsibility for emergency response activities, including structure protection, within their jurisdictions. Local government will order resources deemed necessary to protect structures within their jurisdiction. Local agencies will notbe reimbursed for performing their responsibilities within their jurisdiction.
Tactical Operating Principles When engaging in structure protection activities, as defined above, Forest Service personnel will apply the following principles: • The first priority for all risk decisions is human survival, both of firefighters and the public. • Incident containment strategies specifically address and integrate protection of defendable improved property and wildland values. • Direct protection of improved property is undertaken when itis safe todo so, when there are sufficient time and appropriate resources available, and when the action directly contributes to achieving overall incident objectives. • Firefighter decision to accept direction to engage in structure protection actions is based onthe determination that the property is defendable and the risk to firefighters canbe safely mitigated under the current or potential fire conditions. • A decision to delay or withdraw from structure protection operations isthe appropriate course of action when made in consideration of firefighter safety, current or potential fire behavior, or defensibility ofthe structure or groups of structures. • Firefighters atall levels are responsible to make risk decisions appropriate to their individual knowledge, experience, training, and situational awareness. • Every firefighter is responsible tobe aware ofthe factors that affect their judgment and the decision-making process, including a realistic perception of their own knowledge, skills, and abilities; the presence of life threat or structures; fire behavior; availability of resources; social/political pressures; mission focus; and personal distractions, such as home, work, health, and fatigue. • An individual’s ability to assimilate all available factors affecting situational awareness is limited ina dynamic wildland urban interface fire environment. Every firefighter is responsible to understand and recognize these limitations, andto apply experience, training, and personal judgment to observe, orient, decide, and act in preparation for the “worst case.” • Every firefighter is responsible for participating inthe flow of information with supervisors, subordinates, and peers. Clear and concise communication is essential to overcome limitations in situational awareness.
Chapter 6BIA Program Organization and Responsibilities Bureau of Indian Affairs Fire Management Policy Policy and responsibility for the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) Wildland Fire Management (WFM) Program is documented in Part 90 Indian Affairs Manual (IAM), chapters 1-8. This part identifies the authorities, standards, and procedures that have general and continuing applicability to wildland fire activities under the jurisdiction ofthe Assistant Secretary – Indian Affairs. BIA Mission The BIA mission isto enhance the quality of life, to promote economic opportunity, andto carry out responsibility to protect and improve the trust assets of American Indians, Indian Tribes, and Alaska Natives. Our mission isto execute our fiduciary trust responsibility by protecting lives, property, and resources while restoring and maintaining healthy ecosystems through cost-effective and creative fire management programs, collaboration, and promoting Indian self-determination. BIA Fire Operations Website BIA Division of Wildland Fire Management (DWFM) maintains a website that hosts operational, informational, and policy-related documents. The website also contains information about job recruitment, BIA training, Pathways Internship Program, fuels management, aviation, and wildland fire prevention. Visit the BIA WFM website. Agency Administrator Responsibilities Bureau of Indian Affairs administrators have many responsibilities relating to Wildland Fire Management activities which are provided in part 90 (Wildland Fire Management), IAM, chapters 1-8, subchapter 1.5 (Responsibilities). These also include such activities when contracted for, in whole orin part, with other agencies or Tribes under the statutes cited in620 DM1, appendix 1. These BIA administrators also share three additional common responsibilities not listed inthe 90IAM. These are: • Responsible for the implementation ofan effective WFM program; • Responsible for implementation of policies and recommendations inthe Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy; and • Integrates wildland fire management into natural resource management. Additionally, the following responsibilities are applicable and will ultimately reside in90 IAM7 (Wildfire Response) once this chapter is published. Director, Bureau of Indian Affairs • Reference part 90 (Wildland Fire Management), IAM, chapters 1-8, subchapter 1.5 Responsibilities; and • Responsible for implementation of policies and recommendations inthe Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy. Deputy Bureau Director, Office of Trust Services • Provides for the coordination of wildland fire management activities with other Federal, State, and non- government fire protection agencies. • Reference part 90 (Wildland Fire Management), IAM, chapters 1-8, subchapter 1.5 (Responsibilities). Directorate, Environmental and Natural Resources • Reference part 90 (Wildland Fire Management), IAM, chapters 1-8, subchapter 1.5 (Responsibilities). Chief, Division of Wildland Fire Management • Reference part 90 (Wildland Fire Management), IAM, chapters 1-8, subchapter 1.5 (Responsibilities); • In conjunction with other Federal fire directors, establishes priorities for assignment of critical resources during wildland fire emergencies; • Initiates or participates in boards of review concerning actions taken on selected wildland fires; and • Oversees the national casual and vendor payment programs for emergency incident payments. Regional Directors • Reference part 90 (Wildland Fire Management), IAM, chapters 1-8, subchapter 1.5 Responsibilities; • Oversees allocation model implementation, preparedness, fuels management, community assistance, prevention, emergency wildland fire operations, post-fire activities, medical standards, and Interagency Fire Program Management (IFPM) standards;
• Determines when a critical fire situation has exceeded agency capability and ensures that qualified personnel take immediate charge of fire suppression activities; requests assistance when the wildfire situation exceeds the capability ofthe region's resources; and • Assigns boards of review on selected individual wildland fires which presented unusual problems or situations. Agency Superintendent (unless excepted in regional directives) • Protects Indian trust and restricted lands from wildfire by taking appropriate action as specified inthe approved fire management plan to meet Indian landowner objectives orin the absence ofan approved plan, takes immediate suppression action, consistent with other standards. • Ensures agency fire management personnel develop and maintain fire management job qualifications and meet physical fitness standards in accordance with policy and assign personnel to fire suppression, prescribed fire, wildland fire use activities according to qualifications and demonstrated ability. • Manages personnel to ensure that prevention goals and objectives are being achieved. • Develops, updates, and maintains the local fire preparedness planning activities, wildland fire prevention plan, annual mobilization plans, and ensures initial attack capability and management personnel availability to provide foran adequate level of protection from wildfire. • Develops, updates, and maintains agency fire management plans. • Negotiates cooperative agreements with adjacent protection organizations as needed. • Negotiates reimbursable agreements with Tribal, local, state, and other federal agencies for wildland fire management activities as needed. • Recommends a board of review be established to review actions taken on selected individual fires. • Ensures that all escaped prescribed fire orany prescribed fire that results in resource or property damage are reviewed or investigated. • Requests assistance through appropriate interagency channels when the fire situation exceeds the capabilities ofthe agency's resources. • Initiates investigation of trespass from wildfires to determine cause and origin andif fire trespass has occurred. • Ensures established wildfire investigation procedures and guidance are followed. • Coordinates with appropriate law enforcement agency when wildfire crimes are suspected and/or detected. • Enters and maintains employee fire qualifications inthe Incident Qualifications and Certification System (IQCS) and enters and maintains fire occurrence inthe Bureau fire reporting system. • Coordinate the development of published decisions within the WFDSS for all fires identified as requiring a decision and consistent with authority identified in chapter 11. • Reference part 90, subchapter 1.5 Responsibilities. National Fire Leadership Team The National Fire Leadership Team (NFLT) provides national leadership to ensure weare creating an open forum for discussions, collaboration, and coordination inBIA wildland fire management by: • Providing a forum for open communication, collaboration, and consensus among the members ofthe NFLT. • Addressing BIA and interagency wildland fire program issues brought forward tothe NFLT, subgroups, Regions, Tribes, and the Division of Wildland Fire Management Membership. • Make collaborative decisions that represent the BIA and Tribal programs for interagency wildland fire incident management standards, and incident position standards, which all NWCG agencies utilize. The NFLT consists of: • Division Chief of Wildland Fire Management • Assistant Division Chief of Wildland Fire Management • Regional Fire Management Officers (RFMO) • DWFM Branch Chief’sand Central Office managers Tribal Contracts/Compacts The Tribes have three options to manage fire protection services. Tribes may use direct services, self-determination contracts, or self-governance compacts to manage either a portion orall ofa BIA program. Public Law93-638 (The Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Actof 1975, as amended; Title Iand V) provides maximum Indian participation inthe governance and education ofthe Indian people; to provide for the full participation of Indian Tribes in programs and services conducted bythe Federal Government for Indians andto encourage the development of human resources ofthe Indian people; to establish a program of assistance to upgrade Indian education; to support the right of Indian citizens to control their own educational activities; and for other purposes.
Fire Management Administration These guidelines are intended tobe used bythe BIA and Indian Tribes when negotiating annual funding agreements, whether Public Law93-638 contracts (Title I) or self-governance compacts (Title V). Guiding Principles • Indian Tribal fire management programs are held tothe same standards asBIA fire management programs. Both BIA and Indian Tribal programs will strive to achieve excellence. • Indian Tribal and BIA WFM programs receive equal consideration for available budget and resources. • The BIA is committed to working with Indian Tribes to ensure the success of their WFM programs. • Indian Tribes who desire to compact or contract national, regional or agency fire program functions or services provided bythe BIA, to benefit more than one Indian Tribe, must have a plan to provide comparable functionality or services and agreement of other affected Indian Tribes. Inherently Federal Activities • Hiring, termination and paying Federal employees, including administratively determined (AD) emergency workers (Casuals). • TheAD hiring authority isan inherently Federal activity and requires Federal Government supervision. TheAD hiring authority is granted through the Department ofthe Interior (DOI) tothe BIA and cannot be delegated toa Tribally contracted or compacted program. However, Tribal programs can gather documentation to assist in meeting the requirements ofthe ADPay Plan for Emergency Workers (casuals) and specific national guidance. • Approval, consolidation, and submission of budget requests. • Obligating Federal funds. • Approval of resource management or land use plans, fire management plans (FMPs), NEPA documents, Wildland Fire Decision Support System (WFDSS) documents, post-wildland fire activity (ES/burned area emergency response [BAER]) plans, and delegations of authority to incident management and post-fire activity teams. The BIA must approve the documents inthe preceding sentence to fulfill its trust responsibility in resource protection. • Approval from the BIA Aviation Branch Office is required to utilize Tribal employees and casual hires to staff air attack platforms. Program Operational Standards • Unless waivers tothe following standards are explicitly approved and identified in Tribal annual funding agreements, the following standards will apply to Tribal fire management programs (See Personnel Qualifications, 90IAM): ○ Adherence tothe National Wildfire Coordinating Group (NWCG) Standards for Wildland Fire Position Qualifications, PMS 310-1, is mandatory for all firefighters fighting wildfires onand off their respective jurisdictions. ○ Adherence tothe IFPM standards are mandatory for fire program management officers, fire specialists and fire project leaders. ○ Self-governance compact standards for qualification, physical fitness, and safety will be those established bythe parties tothe agreement but will notbe less than NWCG and IFPM standards when mobilized off their Tribal lands. ○ Agency Superintendent or delegate are responsible for certifying Tribal program employee qualifications and maintaining records of their employee qualifications. All BIA/Tribal units with fire management programs are required touse the IQCS to track all Federal emergency responders. ○ Wildfires that burn Indian trust lands under a Tribe’s protection must be reported and certified inthe Interagency Fire Occurrence Reporting Modules (InFORM) promptly after being declared out. Obligating Government funds isan inherently Federal function and fire reports arean essential element in accounting for the obligation of Federal funds. ○ Placing resource orders for incident management teams (IMT) to manage extended, large fire operations orfor post-wildland-fire-activity teams requires the involvement ofthe BIA. All actions require that the BIA approve delegations of authority to teams. Program Planning Strategic planning for BIA field-level units relies primarily on FMPs (including spatial fire management plans) and fire danger rating trend analysis, per the interagency guidance in chapters 9and 10, respectively. Fire management plans are critical strategic documents that guide the full range of fire management activities. The BIA recommends units supplement agency fire management plans with NWCG-compliant PocketCards or equivalent fire danger assessment tools. The Fire Danger Pocket Card and equivalent tools provide a format for interpreting and communicating key index values provided bythe National Fire Danger Rating System (NFDRS) orthe Canadian
Forest Fire Danger Rating System (CFFDRS). The objective isto lead to greater awareness of environmental and vegetation burning conditions, and subsequently increased firefighter safety, by providing a description of seasonal changes in fire danger ina local area. Itis useful to both local and out-of-area firefighters. Fire Occurrence Data and Reporting Consistent with the Guidance for Implementation of Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy (February 13, 2009), the BIA recognizes two types of wildland fires when collecting and recording fire occurrence data, planned ignitions (i.e., prescribed fires) and unplanned ignitions (e.g., including escaped prescribed fires). Specific guidance regarding prescribed fire data and reporting is provided inthe BIA Fuels Management Program Planning and Implementation Guide. All wildfires that burn on Indian trust lands must be documented with a single, certified individual final fire report inthe InFORM application. For large or otherwise significant wildfires involving Indian trust lands, approved Incident Status Summary (ICS-209) reports, including a designated final report, must also be submitted per the requirements and guidance in chapter 11. Records Management for Fire Reports Individual final fire reports and final ICS-209 reports are official records for wildfires that burn on Indian trust lands. Accordingly, the BIA administrative unit overseeing the affected land is responsible for adhering to Indian Affairs Records Management Manual (https://www.bia.gov/policy-forms/manual) and the local File Maintenance and Disposition Plan concerning management and archiving these records. Additional guidance regarding wildland fire incident records canbe found onthe NWCG Incident Records Management website. Fire Weather/Remote Automatic Weather Stations (RAWS) The fire weather program is managed and coordinated bythe DWFM Operations Section, which has been delegated tothe BIA National RAWS Coordinator (https://raws.nifc.gov/raws-interagency-contacts). This program provides funding and technical support for the maintenance and emergency repairs of station sensors to ensure the accuracy of station data for all BIA stations that area critical component ofthe RAWS Network (see chapter 10) for fire weather and fire danger rating purposes. All stations will adhere tothe NWCG Standards for Fire Weather Stations (PMS 426-3). Stations are serviced through an interagency agreement with the Remote Sensing/Fire Weather Support Unit (RSFWSU) aka RAWS Depot located at NIFC. All permanent stations areon a Modified Service (annual RAWS technician visit) and portable/quick deploy stations areon the Portable Return Service; descriptions canbe found onthe RSFWSU Services tabon NIFC RAWS Homepage. All technical questions about RAWS canbe directed tothe RAWS Help Desk: 208-387-5475, rawshelp@blm.gov. BIA and Tribal Portable Fire Weather Stations All BIA and Tribal portable/quick deploy stations will meet the Fire RAWS Standards and Guidelines inthe NWCG Standards for Fire Weather Stations (PMS 426-3). To facilitate annual maintenance requirements, all stations have been puton a Portable Return Service with the RAWS Depot and must be sent there ona yearly basis inthe following manner: • Goto WXx-Weather (weather.nifc.gov), select Read Only (No Login Required), then select Shipping Label Request onthe left side panel to fill out the form and then select Create Label fora prepaid shipping label. • The entire portable RAWS must be shipped tothe RAWS Depot in order to provide adequate service, this includes: the cabinet, tripod, GOES and VHF antennas, all weather sensors with associated cables, radio (if equipped with anRVT) and vinyl cases with foam inserts. Ifthe original cardboard shipping boxes from the vendor or boxes from the Depot are available, PLEASE SHIP VINYL CASES INSIDE THE CARDBOARD BOXES FOR ADDED PROTECTION. • Upon receipt, the RAWS Depot will refurbish and recalibrate to426-3 standards and return within 90 days or notify receiving unit if unable todo so. • Service exceptions - Units are responsible for components that are damaged beyond normal repair. Maintenance actions will be suspended until replacement components are received. Activation of portable fire weather stations is accomplished by contacting the RAWS Help Desk (208-387-5475, rawshelp@blm.gov) but will notbe processed ifthe station is noncompliant with annual maintenance. Portables are only intended for temporary use and should be deactivated when notin use. They will notbe setup permanently andif that need exists then contact the BIA National RAWS Coordinator (RAWS Contacts) to discuss a permanent solution.
RAWS Management inWXx Weather (WXx) A station inventory, metadata and observations ofBIA RAWS for any Region or Unit canbe found by using the Station Search inWXx Weather (https://weather.nifc.gov/), no login is required, select the icon under Details for any station to access the Observations button and other information. • Each station must have aPOC listed inWXx that canbe responsive to emails/phone calls from the RAWS Depot about annual maintenance, an alternate POCis recommended. • POCs canbe updated by contacting the RAWS Help Desk orthe BIA National RAWS Coordinator. • Ifa POC needs to request Maintenance edit access, then the eRequest form canbe found onthe left side panel under Request Edit Access. This access is only necessary ifyou are responsible for ordering sensors for repair/troubleshooting purposes, viewing Station Event reports, or updating metadata within WXx. BIA and Tribal Smoke Management Smoke impacts to Tribal communities canbe addressed by utilizing Air Resource Advisors (ARA, technical specialist). Air Resource Advisors canbe ordered to work as part of Incident Management Teams (IMTs) when the amount or duration of smoke are anticipated to have negative impacts upon Indian Tribal interests and values. Furthermore, smoke monitoring canbe accomplished using Air Resource Advisors to assess the potential of adverse health impacts of wildland fire smoke to Tribes. Indian Tribal and BIA staff should consider ordering Air Resource Advisors and smoke monitors as part of IMTs when concerns regarding Tribal health, transportation safety, or personnel safety issues from smoke are elevated. Additional information regarding protecting public health from the adverse impacts of wildland fire smoke canbe found inthe Wildland Fire and Air Quality Coordination Secretarial Memorandum of Understanding. Program Preparedness The Wildland Fire Management Program employees should reference the following agreements, contracts, and operating plans as identified inthe Program Planning section above. Preseason Agreements, Contracts and Operating Plans The authority to enter into interagency agreements, cooperative agreements, memorandum of understanding, mutual-aid agreements and contracts is cited in Departmental Manual, Part 620 and respective statues; Indian Affairs Manual (IAM) 90; the Reciprocal Fire Protection Act42 U.S.C. 1856; andis referenced inthe Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy and Program Review. See chapter 8for additional guidance. Tribal Disaster Assistance On January 29, 2013, the President signed the Sandy Recovery Improvement Actof 2013, which amended the Stafford Act. The Act included a provision to provide Federally recognized Indian Tribal governments the option to request a Presidential emergency or major disaster declaration independent ofa State. Tribal governments may still choose to seek assistance under a State declaration request. BIA Office of Emergency Management BIA Office of Emergency Management Part 92IAM outlines BIA Office of Emergency Management’s (OEM) purpose, scope, policy, authorities, responsibilities, definitions, standards and requirements, reports and forms, and training requirements. The OEM isan office within the Office ofthe Director, BIA (DBIA) and serves Indian Affairs by promoting self-sufficiency among Tribes in managing emergency preparedness and response activities. The OEM supports the BIA and Tribes with coordinating response, recovery, and hazard mitigation activities when requested. OEM also supports the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and other Federal agencies with prompt cooperation, coordination, resources, and capabilities for emergency incidents that impact Tribal communities, lands, and resources, and the nation asa whole. Asthe 92IAM 2 outlines OEMis responsible for maintaining bureau wide situational awareness of incident response operations and developing a common operating picture for Indian Affairs senior leaders. This applies toall incidents and events that impact Indian Affairs personnel, lands, facilities, infrastructure, or resources; Tribal lands or insular areas; or incidents and events for which assistance is provided to other units of government under Federal laws, executive orders, interagency plans, or other agreements that requires coordination and communication of emergency situations to Indian Affairs senior leaders andto the DOI, OEM, Interior Operations Center (IOC). Tribal Support for Emergency Support Function (ESF) BIAis an Emergency Support Function (ESF) support agency under the USDA-FSand USFA ESF #4and #5 Annexes. Tribes may provide support through this mechanism; however, they must follow their designated reimbursement process to participate under anESF.
National Program Preparedness/Readiness Reviews Division of Wildland Fire Management (DWFM) will conduct regularly scheduled fire preparedness review of regional offices. Each review will include fiscal and budget reviews of standard operating procedures (SOP) and administrative activities. A schedule will be developed by DWFM, with input from the regions, to coordinate review scheduling. At least one review every five years will be conducted in each region, though more frequent reviews would be preferable. DWFM implementation intentions areto administer one preparedness review and one fiscal accountability review intwo separate regions every year. Additionally, local unit preseason fire preparedness/readiness reviews will be conducted. Standards for preparedness reviews are documented inthe Interagency Fire Preparedness Review Guide. FireCode Business Rules The BIA developed business rules and procedures to implement the FireCode System. The FireCode System User Guide and Business Procedures canbe accessed through the BIA-NIFC office. Wildfires onBIA Trust Land BIA/Tribal Unit isthe Host Unit Wildfires onBIA Trust land (BIA/Tribal unit isthe host unit) will have an assigned FireCode. • BIA/Tribe host unit dispatcher will ensure that a unique FireCode is associated with every wildfire. The recommended workflow isto acquire the FireCode via the computer-aided dispatch application or InFORM (instead of creating a record directly inthe FireCode application). • The FireCode will be used bythe BIA when entering an obligation tothe Financial and Business Management System (FBMS). Contract/compact Tribes will use this code to identify all costs associated with an incident. • Compact/contract Tribes will use the FireCode to identify costs for wildfires when reporting tothe BIA regional office. • BIA-NIFC will generate one false alarm FireCode for each region which will be used for each false alarm fire report. BIA/Tribal Resources Are Ordered from Another BIA/Tribal Unit(s) • All BIA/Tribal resources responding will use the hosting BIA/Tribal unit’s FireCode to charge all financial obligations related to that wildfire. • Compact/contract Tribes will use the FireCode to identify their respective costs for assistance to other BIA/Tribal units when reporting tothe regional office. Wildfires on Another Agency’s Land Where BIA/Tribe is Ordered Another Federal Agency isthe Host Unit • All BIA/Tribal resources responding to other Federal agency fires will usea FireCode created bythe host Federal agency. • Compact/contract Tribes will use the FireCode to identify their respective costs for assistance to other Federal agencies when reporting tothe regional office. State Agency isthe Host Unit • All BIA/Tribal resources responding to State agency wildfires will create a FireCode for each fire ifa FireCode has not already been created by another Federal agency. Ifa FireCode has been created, the BIA/Tribal unit(s) will use that FireCode asthe charge code (project code) for all financial obligations related to that wildfire. • BIA/Tribal units will document their action viaa formal resource order and/ora fire report in InFORM that is categorized asan “out-of-area response” when responding to another unit’s wildfire. • Compact/contract Tribes will use the FireCode to identify their respective costs for assistance to State agencies when reporting tothe regional office. Short-Term Severity Short-term severity actions where additional local resources are employed under operations to supplement readiness capability asa direct result of short-duration, high fire danger onBIA Trust lands. • DWFM will generate one short-term severity FireCode for each region. • Each region will use the short-term severity FireCode to cover local short-term severity needs relating to employing additional personnel. • Request touse the short-term severity FireCode must be made tothe regional FMO, or their acting, and approval given before the FireCode isto be used.
Long-Term Severity Long-term severity FireCodes will be used byBIA resources to identify all costs related to approve BIA wildfire severity actions. • All severity requests will be submitted tothe DWFM for approval. Upon approval, the DWFM will generate a FireCode and notify the region ofthe FireCode and authorized funding level. • The FireCode will be used to charge all authorized financial obligations for readiness under the severity request. • Ifa BIA agency/Tribe responds to another BIA agency/Tribe’s severity request, the responding BIA agency/Tribe will use the hosting agency/Tribal unit’s FireCode to charge all financial obligations. • Compact/contract Tribes will use the FireCode to identify their respective severity costs when reporting tothe regional office. Casual Training A FireCode established bythe DWFM will be used byall BIA units to charge obligations related to administratively determined (AD) or casual workers during training. BIA units must usea FireCode with their organizational code to charge obligations for casual field exercises. Wildland Fire Severity Support to Other Agencies To account for resource usage and costs incurred when BIA provides severity support to other agencies, the DWFM will generate a separate FireCode for each agency (USFS, BLM, FWS, NPS, and State/local). In lieu of using the requesting agency’sown FireCode (ifany), the BIA-issued FireCode will be used byBIA units to charge all authorized financial obligations for readiness related to their support of another agency’s severity actions. Wildland Fire Management Funding Preparedness Activity This activity consists ofall the actions needed to prepare for the response to wildland fire ignitions. Preparedness funds provide support tothe overall management and planning ofBIA and Indian Tribal fire management programs. Preparedness includes butis not limited to readiness and capability to provide safe, cost-effective fire management programs in support ofL/RMPs. This activity includes the hiring and training of fire personnel, purchasing/contracting of equipment and supplies, support, planning and coordination, policy development, oversight, and research. Interagency coordination and direction includes establishment and funding of interagency agreements and interagency-fair-share contributions. • Indian Tribes are eligible for indirect costs from the wildland fire appropriation for preparedness. • Wildland Fire Management funding and indirect costs maybe included inthe Indian Tribal annual funding agreements (AFA). For compact wildland fire preparedness, wildland fire prevention, and interagency hotshot programs, funding shall be transferred tothe Office of Self-Governance (OSG) bythe DWFM budget. • One-time funding orone-time project funding will be applied for annually and distributed tothe region for distribution to agencies/Tribes. Funding shall be transferred tothe OSGby the DWFM. These are project-based, one-time transfers of funds. Indirect costs onnon-recurring orone-time wildland fire preparedness funds are not authorized. Indian Tribal and BIA programs will be given equal consideration for non-recurring preparedness funding and will be coordinated atthe regional office level. Suppression Activity This activity provides for the development and implementation of three operation components: suppression, post- wildland-fire activities, and severity. • Funding is obtained by Indian Tribes through agreements established byBIA regional offices or other Federal agencies to reimburse Indian Tribes for fire costs ona fire-by-fire basis (per FireCode). Indirect costs for fire suppression are not authorized. • Severity (short- and long-term) authority and funding for activities necessary to augment initial attack capability when abnormal fire conditions occur throughout a region resulting inthe fire season starting earlier than normal or exceeding average high fire danger ratings for periods. Funding is obtained by Tribes through agreements established byBIA regional offices or other Federal agencies to reimburse Indian Tribes for severity costs incurred under an approved, fire severity cost request. Indirect costs for severity funds are not authorized. • Post wildland fire activities include all post-fire, burned-area activities covered by approved plans. Funding is obtained by Indian Tribes through agreements established byBIA regional offices or other Federal agencies to reimburse Indian Tribes for costs ona project-by-project basis (per FireCode). Indirect costs for emergency stabilization projects are not authorized, however reasonable administrative and overhead costs incurred by Indian Tribes in such projects maybe authorized within stabilization plans and should be built into the project and treated asa direct cost.
Interagency Severity Funding Request Procedures Qualification of Need Severity funds and project approval will be identified bya severity FireCode generated by DWFM. Requests for special projects must be evaluated and approved bythe respective regional office and forwarded to DWFM for approval and execution. All costs associated with a severity request must include the severity FireCode when procuring and/or encoding to FBMS. Fire danger models or analysis software (FireFamily Plus) graphically contrasts the current seasonal trend for energy release component (ERC) and/orbut burning index (BI), with all-time worst and historical average ERC and/orBI, based onan analysis of year-round data. To adequately quantify the need for severity funding, at least oneof the criteria listed below should demonstrate that abnormal conditions exist. • Palmer Index or standardized precipitation indices that specify the departure from normal. • Fuel loading quantitative information comparing current tothe average. • Current local fuel moisture compared to average trend and all-time worst provided bythe Normalized Differences Vegetative Index (NDVI) and/or Live Fuel Moisture Project reports. Note: Data from NDVI and Live Fuel Moisture Project maybe a week oldor older. • NWS30-day weather outlook. • Weather station NFDRS number and name. Narrative Statement Provide a brief statement ofthe interagency situation (local and geographic). Each agency should request funds only for their respective needs, not for needs of another agency. Sharing resources when all parties have needs is desirable. When requesting prevention or investigation resources, the following information must be included: • Human-caused fire activity; number of human-caused fires to date as compared to previous years (include leading fire cause category); • Description ofhow the prevention and/or investigation team will be utilized (i.e., shared resource covering multiple agencies/tribes implementing prevention campaigns, etc.); • Any significant upcoming events or activities); and • Justification for additional funds for prevention materials or supplies. Severity requests for prevention/investigation resources areto be reviewed bythe regional WUI/prevention specialist. Requested Resources Requested resources should be identified by type, quantity, and cost using the severity cost estimation worksheet. Utilize the “Prevention" tab for requesting prevention/investigation resources. Budget Management This section governs useof the BIA’sWFM appropriation account structure, procedures, cost accounting, and one- time funding procedures. Personnel atall levels within the BIA need tobe aware ofthe responsibilities and limitations onthe useof these funds, which this chapter and other financial and budget handbooks address. Program Budget Annual Appropriations Annual appropriations are made available for the WFM, pursuant tothe passage ofthe annual appropriation act for the DOI and related agencies. The WFM appropriation isa no-year appropriation. Funded Program Procedures WFM funds, excluding emergency suppression funding (unless under a continuing resolution), will be distributed tothe DWFM Budget Management office, which distributes funds toWFM regional office programs. The exception tothe allocation is compacted programs which will be disbursed directly from WFM-NIFC toOSG. Instructions documented ona financial allocation form (i.e., funding entry document orFED) detail how distributions areto be made from regions to agencies/Tribes for preparedness programs. One-Time Funding/Critical Needs The One-Time Funding Program provides mechanisms to request funding for special projects or needs that exceed an agency’s regular budgeted funds. Funds used in this program are non-recurring in nature and are based on either available prior year unobligated balances or unused indirect costs. DWFM staff will issue a memorandum annually during the second quarter with a standard form that will identify timelines for current year. The individual plans are required tobe submitted to regional offices for review, changes or rejection. Once approved atthe regional level, the requests will be forwarded to DWFM. Critical needs projects are high priority oran activity ready for implementation and require immediate funding atthe start ofthe FY, before
appropriations bills are signed. Critical needs should only cover three months of project needs but will continue under CRs until an appropriations bill is passed. One-time funding for preparedness (signed bythe appropriate regional director) will be submitted toWFM Budget Officer no later than May 15th for the upcoming fiscal year for current year needs. Requests received after deadlines will be given lower priority. DWFM staff will evaluate all requests based onthe region’s prioritization and the availability of funds. Procedures for One-Time Funding Submission One-time funding requests must be submitted using the following process: • Requests are submitted tothe regional office for approval. The process verifies the request meets the intent and fire policy ofDOI appropriation act language. • The regional office then submits prioritized funding requests tothe DWFM Budget office. • Work breakdown structure (WBS) tobe assigned by DWFM Budget orthe DC Central Office. BIA National Wildland Fire Fleet Engine Program The BIA National Wildland Fire Fleet Engine Program was created bythe BIAin 1996. The objective ofthe program isto provide a centralized process for replacement parts and training ofBIA fleet engine pumping systems. Detailed information onthe program canbe found inthe BIA National Fleet Wildland Engine Program Operations Guide. Mission/Policy • Provide a standardized BIA fleet engine for the participating agency or Tribal organization. • Provide an opportunity to supply trucks for BIA fleet engine pumping systems. • Provide repair support services to agency-/tribally owned apparatus for approved number of engines. • Provide training inthe use and maintenance ofthe BIA fleet engine pumping systems. • Provide the Fire Equipment Maintenance Procedure and Record (FEMPR) to document daily inspections and maintenance for all BIA fleet engines. • Evaluate new equipment and BIA fleet engine center improvements to meet the wildland fire program needs. • Provide emergency repair or replacement for BIA fleet engine pumping systems. • No aftermarket parts ofany kind areto be placed onany BIA fleet engine equipment without prior approval from the Deputy, Fire Operations and concurrence from the program center managers. Vehicle Maintenance, Replacement, and Repairs Daily preventative maintenance checks, regular servicing, prompt repairs, and lifecycle replacement are critical to providing mission readiness, performance, and safe operation. Annual Safety Inspections, Scheduled Maintenance, and Daily Inspections Fire personnel are required to complete and document annual safety inspections, regularly scheduled preventative maintenance, and daily (or pretrip) inspections for all BIA wildland fire vehicles. Annual safety inspections must be documented on Form 1520-35or designated local form. Regularly scheduled preventative maintenance, unscheduled maintenance, and repairs for DOI-owned (I-plate) vehicles are recorded in FBMS. Daily inspections must be kept with the vehicle records for the life of that vehicle. The cost ofall vehicle repairs and maintenance isthe responsibility ofthe individual region, agency, or Tribe unless the damage is directly attributable to operations ona wildfire. In that case, with approval from the incident commander (IC), the damages maybe paid for under the fire’s suppression account. Wildland fire vehicles that are not operationally sound or have safety deficiencies must notbe put into service. In addition, vehicles that suffer from mechanical or safety issues while enroute oron assignment must be taken outof service atthe earliest opportunity in which itis safe todo soand must notbe put back into service until corrective action canbe completed. Organization The program is organized into three geographical areas: • Missoula, MT, services the Northwest, Rocky Mountain, and north half ofthe Pacific Region. • Eagle Butte, SD, services the Great Plains, Midwest, and Eastern Regions. • Dulce, NM, services the Southwest, Western, Navajo, Eastern Oklahoma, Southern Plains, and south half ofthe Pacific Region.
Emergency Repairs Emergency fire-related repairs toa BIA fleet engine pumping package will be requested through the assigned user area BIA Fleet Engine Center. The request will be reviewed and approved bythe center manager before a service truck is dispatched or replacement parts are sent tothe requesting agency. Non-Emergency/Non-Suppression Repairs Non-emergency repairs shall be charged tothe identified agency account. The account will be approved byan agency official (e.g., FMO, forest manager, superintendent) before the requested action is taken. Authorization of account will be sent by email or signed fax identifying account, name, and title of authorizing official. Initial requests for all non-emergency repairs will be requested through the assigned user area BIA Fleet Engine Center. The request will be reviewed and approved bythe BIA Fleet Engine Center manager before a service truck is dispatched or replacement part is mailed tothe requesting agency. All emergency and non-emergency repair expenditures shall be charged toan appropriate account. Administration The program is administered through DWFM Fire Operations. ABIA Fleet Engine Oversight Group has been established to plan, develop, and budget for the annual operations ofthe program. The group is comprised ofthe BIA Fleet Engine Program leads at each center and the Deputy, Fire Operations. Trucks and fabrication orders for the BIA fleet engines are procured nationally through the DWFM office. Fire Facility Construction and Maintenance Activity The fire facility construction and maintenance activity provides for the maintenance and construction of fire facilities for line items funded within the DOI wildland fire appropriation only. All projects are approved through a consolidated DOI process and entered into the DOI’s five-year plan. The5-year plan isa fiscal-year-based plan andis part ofthe overall budget process. The plan requires annual updating so that the budget request continues to reflect a5-year picture ofthe actual need. Asa result, the schedule of activities is based onthe fiscal year, not the calendar year. The annual update presents the opportunity for the fire bureaus to adjust project priorities based on newly identified needs or previously identified needs that have become more critical during the past year. Projects inthe out-years may also be removed become more critical during the past year. Projects inthe out-year may also be removed because they were addressed through other means. The Bureau’s five-year plan submissions are completed at least a year before Congress enacts the annual appropriation. Submissions must consist ofthe following: • Projects for construction of fire facilities must be included inthe five-year DOI Facilities Construction Plan and identified as part ofthe Wildland Fire Annual Budget Appropriation. • Funding is obtained by Indian Tribes through BIA regional offices via cooperative agreements, contracts, or through agreements with other Federal agencies to reimburse Indian Tribes for fire facilities construction costs ona project-by-project basis. • Indirect costs for fire facilities and deferred maintenance construction projects are not authorized. Administrative fees are authorized when requests have them built into the total cost ofthe construction project asa direct cost. National Aviation Program The DWFM, Aviation Branch Office, recommends BIA policy, procedures, and standards, and maintains functional oversight and interagency coordination for all aviation activities. The Aviation Branch is staffed with aviation personnel who can provide technical aviation expertise and guidance within all BIA regions. Program Requirements To successfully pass annual airbase reviews andbe considered ready and fit for aviation operations, the following criteria must bemet: • Regional and Unit Office Supervision, Management, and Plans ○ The regional office must have a qualified Aviation Manager who meets DOI policy as minimum, which is identified in https://www.iat.gov/docs/IAT_Requirements_Matrix.pdf, Appendix 2, IAT Aviation Training Matrix. ○ The regional or unit level aviation manager must have a current delegation of authority from the respective line officer. ○ The regional office must have a line officer approved and signed regional aviation plan submitted tothe BIA Aviation Branch Office. The plan must comply toDOI OPM-6DOI National Aviation Management Plan and Project Aviation Safety Plan Requirements. The Aviation Branch Office may assist inthe review ofthe regional and unit level plans.
○ Units hosting aviation operations or employing personnel performing aviation duties must also meet the aviation manager training requirements identified inIAT, appendix 2. • Funding and Staffing ○ The aviation program maybe allocated personnel funding after submitting the appropriate budget request tothe BIA Aviation Branch Office. ○ Funding request will be discussed with the BIA National Budget Office and funding levels will be determined bythe current and planned personnel tobe hired within the MAP. ○ Aviation allocated funding will be tracked using the appropriate budget method provided bythe Aviation Branch Office. Funding allocated for aviation personnel must be utilized within the initially requested purpose. ○ Supplemental funding maybe requested tothe Aviation Branch Office for further review bythe Budget Branch. ○ The program must have NWCG and IAT qualified supervision and crew staffing, in accordance with interagency standards. Staffing levels canbe found in chapter 16and further details inthe BIA National Aviation Plan. ○ Minimum staffing levels must include the top five core positions, which must be permanently hired bythe respective program. • Safety Standards ○ Aviation programs must meet all Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and interagency Safety Management System components inthe interagency checklists used for the reviews and evaluations. ○ Subject area specific programs must successfully pass all components ofthe appropriate annual airbase review tobe approved for aviation operations each year. ○ The program must meet all requirements identified inthe DOI5-year Aviation Evaluation as well asall contractual requirements stated in exclusive-use contracts prior to commencement ofthe MAP. • Training, Qualifications, and Certifications ○ All crew personnel must meet all training, qualifications, and certifications for the hired position prior to contract MAP. ○ All training, qualifications, and certifications must be verified inthe appropriate NWCG and IAT training databases and supporting must be maintained bythe supervisor. • Facilities and Infrastructure ○ Airbase facilities must meet interagency, local, state, and Federal Aviation Administration Safety Management System (SMS) requirements. ○ Airbases supporting helicopter operations must comply with FAA and NWCG standards for landing pad size and quality. ○ Airbases supporting fixed-wing operations must meet FAA and NWCG runway, taxiway, ramp, and parking area safety and quality standards. ○ Adequate and safe storage must be provided for hazardous materials, equipment, program-required inventory, and government-acquired vehicles. ○ Sufficient office space for program management, contractors, ready rooms, crew workspaces, and shared common areas are required. ○ Facilities must be able to accommodate increased accommodation needs ofup-tempo operations and provide parking for employees and visitors. • Vehicle Requirements ○ The vehicle configuration must be adequate to safely and efficiently transport personnel, gear, and equipment. Vehicles must meet interagency and bureau safety standards and accommodate crew size. • Annual Airbase Reviews ○ The airbase and program must pass an annual review to ensure compliance with minimum safety requirements and interagency standards for operating government contracted aircraft. ○ The review will be scheduled as early as15-days prior tothe contract’sMAP andas late as30-days after commencement ofthe MAP. Written notice will be provided tothe respective level of management office. ○ The standard interagency checklists will be used for evaluations. ○ The Aviation Branch Office, Regional Aviation Office, or unit-level offices may supplement these checklists as needed but shall not reduce standard documents. ○ Program personnel will be provided with the review components prior to reviews and evaluations taking place. ○ A final report identifying findings, deficiencies, and accolades will be provided tothe regional management office then routed tothe Fire Director and finally tothe Bureau Director. ○ These reports are significant factors in determining aviation contract management capabilities.
• Final Reports for Annual Airbase Reviews ○ The review team will compile a final report within 30 days ofthe completion ofthe annual review documenting whether the airbase and program meet the minimum requirements to safely operate an exclusive-use aircraft. • Readiness Evaluations ○ Readiness evaluations may include other preparedness programs and personnel to ensure general program readiness, compliance. Budget reviews maybe included in these evaluations. ○ Advance written notice will be provided tothe respective management office. ○ A report will be provided tothe regional management office. • Site Visits ○ Site visits will be conducted throughout the MAP and extensions to ensure contract administration, safety, compliance. The goals are quality assurance and overall operations effectiveness. These visits can occur inthe field and during incident operations. These review teams will notify the regional, unit, and incident management prior to visiting. ○ A follow-up report maybe compiled and provided tothe regional management office or current supervisor as needed. • DOI5-Year Aviation Evaluations ○ The DOI Office of Aviation Services, Safety, Training, Program Evaluation, and Quality Management Office schedules regional aviation evaluations in collaboration with the BIA Aviation Branch Office and Regional offices to align DOI level aviation safety, operations, and policy assurance. ○ Reports are provided tothe Aviation Branch Office, Fire Director, Regional Managers, Regional Directors, and Bureau Directors with time sensitive response requirements. • Compliance and Accountability ○ The BIA Aviation Branch Office will ensure compliance with all aviation policies to maintain the safety, efficiency, and effectiveness of aviation operations. ○ Failure to meet FAA, DOI, BIA, and interagency standards and requirements will affect aircraft contracting options. Aviation Program Goals The Aviation Branch supports all BIA aviation activities and missions with various assets through strategic program guidance, managing aviation programs of national scope, in coordination with the Office of Aviation Services (OAS) and interagency partners. The Aviation Branch Office has the responsibility and authority, after consultation with regional FMOs, for funding and acquisition ofall fire aircraft, prioritizing the allocation ofBIA aircraft ona bureau wide basis, and approving regional office requests to acquire supplemental aircraft resources. Regional Office Level Regional aviation managers or official delegate are responsible for providing oversight for aircraft hosted in their region and have the authority and responsibility to approve, with the Aviation Branch Office concurrence, acquisition of supplemental aircraft resources within their region. Regional aviation managers or official delegate have the authority to prioritize the allocation, prepositioning, and movement ofall aircraft assigned tothe BIA within their region. Regional aviation managers must have a signed delegation letter providing authority to make aviation related decision within their regional jurisdiction. To include authority to implement aviation program objectives and directives to support the BIA mission and each region’s goals. Some regions may have additional support staff assigned to support aircraft operations andto provide technical expertise. A regional aviation management plan is required to outline goals ofthe region’s aviation program andto identify policy and procedures specific to that region. Important Note: A region isnot generally authorized to supplement this policy with more restrictive policy or procedures than the national policy, unless the policy or procedure is approved bythe Aviation Branch Office. The aviation branch meets Department ofthe Interior and interagency standards when hosting exclusive-use aviation programs in support of wildland fire operations and other non-fire mission activities. The standards align with the DOI Departmental Manual, Parts 112, 350, 351, 352, and 353, Indian Affairs Manual, Part 57, and aviation policies. These policies apply toall BIA Aviation programs including the personnel, equipment, and facilities necessary to support wildland fire and other bureau missions.
Agency/Field Office Level Agency, field managers, and staff manage their programs as necessary to conduct their aviation operations safely. Agency aviation managers (AAMs) serve asthe focal point for the agency aviation program by providing technical expertise and management of aviation resources to support agency programs. Many agencies have aviation management asa collateral duty; therefore, during periods of intense aviation activity (e.g., wildland fire support), ensure aviation oversight is maintained. When other duties interfere or compete with effective aviation management, request assistance from the regional office. Agencies are responsible for hosting, supporting, providing daily management, and dispatching all aircraft assigned to their unit. Agencies have the authority to request additional resources, establish priorities, and make assignments for all aircraft assigned tothe BIA within their agency. AAMs have the responsibility for aviation activities atthe local level, including aviation mission planning, risk management and safety, supervision, and evaluation. AAMs assist line officers with risk assessment/management and cost analysis. All Tribal and agency offices utilizing aircraft should have a current and approved aviation management plan on file. Aviation Safety The BIA and the interagency partners adhere tothe standard Safety Management Systems (SMS) asthe foundation toour aviation safety program. For further information, reference chapter 16. All safety-related issues to include SAFECOMs will be communicated tothe Aviation Branch Office and routed tothe appropriate aviation safety certified individual. All senior executives and federally appointed executive flights must be coordinated with the Aviation Branch Office atthe beginning ofthe request to ensure proper and timely planning. Refer toOPM-7, OMB Circular A-126, and BIA National Aviation Plan. Flight Request and Approval Individuals will document (e.g., Aircraft Flight Request/Schedule [9400-1a]) all flight requests via the process defined inthe regional and agency aviation plans and follow the National Interagency Standards for Resource Mobilization, chapter 80, Flight Management Procedures. Safety and Risk Management Critical Incident Stress Management (CISM) Program Standard of Care and Certification The Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) Division of Wildland Fire Management is committed to crisis intervention practices that adhere tothe standard of care established bythe International Critical Incident Stress Foundation (ICISF, https://icisf.org/), to provide stabilization of personnel and preventing further harm. A licensed mental health professional (MHP) is required to assist critical incident peer support (CIPS) groups. Peer supporters are not trained nor are they qualified to operate independently; doing sois a violation ofthe established boundaries of competence and compromises the integrity ofthe program. CISM Qualifications All BIA DWFM personnel participating ina CISM response shall be qualified asa CISM team member (CISM) oras a CISM team leader (CISL). Position qualifications are adopted from the Department ofthe Interior (DOI) Incident Positions Qualification Guide (IPQG) and are inthe Federal Wildland Fire Qualifications Supplement. Special consideration shall be given when recommending or approving either CISM or CISL. A recommendation bythe employee’s fire management officer is required. This recommendation will goto the BIA CISM coordinator for approval. CISM Request Processes The BIA Division of Wildland Fire Management CISM Program is intended for employees who work inthe fire and aviation program with work-related needs but may assist other employees as needed and requested. Crisis intervention should be based on recognition of need, not strictly the occurrence ofan event. What is appropriate will depend onthe nature, severity, and duration ofthe event; the number, skills, and cohesiveness of those involved; and the severity of their physical and emotional symptoms. The CISM Program does not replace professional counseling and other services available to employees through the BIA Mental Health and Wellbeing Program, the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), ora health insurance plan, butit does help align those resources asan appropriate next step when applicable. CISM information canbe found at https://gacc.nifc.gov/cism/index.html.
• Fire Request – The BIA DWFM does not maintain standing CISM teams oran on-call rotation. An agency administrator (AADM) or designee places all CISM requests through the BIA Mental Health Support Request telephone line at (208) 242-8430. The BIA Mental Health team will review requests to ensure a coordinated response based onthe nature ofthe request, including but not limited to severity, duration, time and number of personnel involved. The National CISM Coordinator will coordinate requests through Interagency Resources Ordering Capability (IROC) with the respective Geographic Area Coordination Center. Units requesting CISM must also route the request through the Regional Fire Management Officer, who will notify the Director of Wildland Fire Operations. • Non-Fire Request – BIA requests for CISM support for non-fire incidents must be authorized bythe Director, Division of Wildland Fire Management. CISM (peer support) isnot always the most appropriate resource for non-fire-related incidents. CISM was designed for first responders such as firefighters and law enforcement. Non-fire CISM requests should be placed through the BIA Mental Health Support Request telephone line at208-242-8430. The BIA Fire Director approves non-fire requests for support ona case-by-case basis. Useof the coordination system isnot required for non-fire events. Motor Vehicle Operation Policy The BIA requires supervisors to ensure all wildland fire personnel who operate Government-owned and/or -leased vehicles have the proper licensure and operators need to abide bythe rules ofthe State in which operating. This includes ensuring employees have the appropriate commercial driver's license, tank endorsements, air brake endorsements, and other applicable certifications. Additional resources regarding BIA driving requirements canbe found under “Motor Vehicle Information” onthe DWFM Fire Safety webpage (https://www.bia.gov/bia/ots/dfwfm/bwfm/safety). Fire Vehicle Driver Orientation course, BL-300, and the Wildland Fire Safety Training Annual Refresher, RT-301, are mandatory for all BIA wildland fire management and support personnel who operate vehicles. This includes all general schedule (GS), administratively determined (AD), and Tribal personnel performing wildland fire and prescribed fire operations. Training instruction forBL-300 and RT-301 can be found atBIA Fire Vehicle Driving Training. Lights-and-Sirens Response Responding toBIA wildfire incidents normally does not warrant the use of emergency lights and sirens to safely and effectively perform the BIA mission. However, there maybe rare or extenuating circumstances when limited useof lights and sirens are appropriate and necessary dueto an immediate threat to life. Those BIA regions that determine a lights-and-sirens response is necessary to meet mission requirements must develop an operating plan that is signed and approved bythe regional director and forwarded tothe Chief, Division of Fire Operations, BIA. The operating plan must ensure the following: 1. All vehicles (command, engines, etc.) will be properly marked, equipped, and operated in accordance with State statutes, codes, permits, and BIA unit requirements. 2. Drivers will complete training inthe proper useof lights-and-sirens response in accordance with National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 1451 and 1002 standards, as well asany State requirements. 3. Engine drivers responding with lights and sirens will be minimally qualified as engine operator with a qualified engine boss inthe engine; otherwise, the driver must be engine-boss qualified. Command vehicle drivers will be minimally qualified as single resource boss. 4. Lights and sirens will meet NFPA and State code requirements. 5. Posted speed limits will be followed atall times, regardless of response type. 6. Operators will stop or reduce speed as circumstances dictate prior to proceeding through all intersections. 7. Traffic light changing mechanisms (e.g., Opticons) will only be used under formal written agreement with State and local governments and only when necessary to create safe right-of-way through urban high-traffic areas. All pertinent State and local statutes and procedures will be adhered to. 8. Authorization to respond with lights and sirens does not cross State lines. No driver will be authorized byone State to operate with lights and sirens in another State. Physical Fitness and Conditioning The NWCG Standards for Wildland Fire Position Qualifications, PMS 310-1, establishes physical fitness standards for NWCG-sanctioned firefighters. These standards are assessed using the work capacity tests (WCT). Prior to attempting the WCT, all permanent, career-seasonal, temporary, andAD/EFF employees who participate in wildland fire activities requiring a fitness level of arduous must participate inthe DOI Medical Qualification Standards Program (DOI MSP).
Employees serving in wildland fire line-going positions that require a fitness rating of arduous, moderate, or light are authorized to perform physical fitness conditioning forup to five hours per week, notto exceed more than two hours per day. Units will maintain a fitness program that ensures BIA firefighters will possess the physical ability to perform the duties of their positions safely and effectively while ensuring compliance with the requirements ofthe WCT. Information onthe WCT and the DOI MSPis located in chapter 13. Business Management and Administration The BIA follows the uniform application (IAM Part 90, 1.2, [18]) ofthe interagency policies and guidelines as developed inthe NWCG Standards for Interagency Incident Business Management, PMS 902. BIA will follow the direction set forth inthe NWCG Standards for Interagency Incident Business Management inall incident business management functions except where specific to agency legal mandates, policies, rules, or regulations. Casuals Hired as Drivers When Employed byBIA In accordance with the BIA motor vehicle policy, casuals hired as drivers are required to possess a valid driver’s license in order to operate a motor vehicle and have a safe driving record. Agencies should recruit a pool of drivers prior to fire season. Applicants must submit GSA Form 3607, Government Motor Vehicle Operator’s License and Driving Record, in advance verifying a favorable driving record. • Form 3607 will be processed through regional channels to retrieve the driving record ofthe application with the State, or National Driver Registry and applicable Tribe. • Regional directors can contact the Division of Safety and Risk Management for information on completing and submitting Form 3607. • Meeting the qualification requirements fora motor vehicle license isa condition of employment within BIA for those individuals whose duties require the operation ofa motor vehicle for official wildland fire operations business. Failure to adhere tothe policy will result in automatic termination ofthe casual. Request for Funding Authorization The authorization and procedure for use ofthe operations “suppression” program account (AF2001010), for emergency workers field activities isas follows: • A regional funding request plan must be completed that identifies the program need for casual funding for field activities only; • The request must be submitted through the regional FMOby January 1stof each year; and • The requests will be reviewed and authorized in writing tothe respective agency. Acquisitions Per90 IAM, the WFM program requires adherence tothe NWCG Standards for Interagency Incident Business Management in conducting wildland fire business. The BIA DWFM’s waiver for fire/emergency personnel purchases are cited in National policy memoranda (https://www.bia.gov/policy-forms/memoranda) Expanded Government Charge Card Purchase Authority During Emergency Wildland Fire Operations, dated 6/12/03. The exceptions are: • Meals, beverages, and lodging – This exception will be used to lodge and feed employees without credit cards orto support mixed charge card/non-charge card crews. • Personal gear – This exception will be used to purchase personal items if destroyed, lost, or stolen while serving onthe fire crew/emergency incident (e.g., clothing, footwear and/or toiletries). • Payment of medical treatment for casuals and overhead when authorized for incident agency-provided medical care (APMC). Emergency Equipment Rental Agreements The Emergency Equipment Payment Operating Guidelines provides procedure, guidance, and instructions toBIA WFM Programs, regional fire management offices, agency offices, Office of Financial Management, and Office of Acquisition and Property for implementation ofthe emergency equipment rental agreements (EERA) payment process. Refer tothe NWCG Standards for Interagency Incident Business Management, chapter 20, for EERA administration. Wildland Fire Decision Support System The BIA follows interagency policy regarding useof the Wildland Fire Decision Support System (WFDSS) found in chapter 11.
Fuels Management, Planning and Implementation The national and interagency policy guides for fuels management programs are contained inthe following guides and handbooks: • 90IAM 4 Fuels Management • NWCG Standards for Prescribed Fire Planning and Implementation, PMS 484, May 2022 • BIA Fuels Management Program Supplement tothe NWCG Standards for Prescribed Fire Planning and Implementation, 2022. • BIA Fuels Program Business Management Handbook, February 2008. • Interagency Standards for Fire and Fire Aviation Operations, chapter 17. Exclusive useof these handbooks and guides enhances intra- and interagency program continuity, avoids duplication, reduces the chances to misinterpret policy, and provides one location for the fuels programs policy ina fire management and political environment where changes occur frequently. Please call the Director of Fuels Management (DWFM) for more information. Prescribed Fire Review The goal ofa prescribed fire review isto provide recommendations and identify deficiencies and specific corrective actions. Reviews donot have tobe associated with a specific incident. Any prescribed-fire-related incident that has resource or property damage that may result ina claim for compensation shall initiate a review. The review team and their expertise should be commensurate with the scope and focus ofthe review. Interagency participation is encouraged with team selection. Fire Communications and Education Early Alert Notification Process Early Alerts will be made via phone call anda written Early Alert Notification. All units (Federal and Tribal) will provide information tothe regional fire management office and the DWFM duty officer (DO) within six hours ofthe incident. • Crew supervisor notifies the unit fire management officer (FMO). • Unit FMO notifies regional fire management officer (RFMO) and dispatch center. ○ Dispatch center: If4th tier, notifies 3rd tier dispatch center who then notifies the GACC. • Regional fire management officer (RFMO) will immediately notify the DWFM duty officer at: 208-387-5080 AND within six hours; email to EarlyAlert@bia.gov. Situations Requiring an Early Alert Notification • Fatality • Injury requiring transports to medical facility • Significant property damage to equipment • Serious wildland fire accident • Wildland fire accident • Entrapment/burnover • Shelter deployment • Near-miss • Aviation accident • Evacuations • Highway and interstate closures • Structure loss • Escape prescribed fire • Fire approaching large fire thresholds (100 acres in timber; 300 acres in grass) • Any wildland fire management delegation of authority issued bya line officer The Early Alert Notification Communication Process template (https://www.bia.gov/bia/ots/dfwfm/bwfm/safety) and Wildland Fire Fatality and Entrapment Initial Report, PMS 405-1, are accessible online.
Notification Requirements for Entrapments or Fatalities Ifa wildland fire entrapment or fatality occurs, immediate notification tothe National lnteragency Coordination Center (NICC) is required using the Wildland Fire Fatality and Entrapment Initial Report, PMS 405-1. Following the issuance ofan Early Alert, the local unit will provide the PMS 405-1to the 3rd tier dispatch center which will then provide itto the GACC electronically within 24 hours. The GACC immediately notifies the NICC coordinator on duty (COD) and within 24 hours, submits the PMS 405-1to NICC COD. Wildland Fire Media Relations Guidance During dynamic events such as wildland fire, providing accurate information is critical for public safety. Tobe effective, communication must be timely, ifnot immediate. For this reason, news bulletins and routine fire information pertaining tothe topics listed below are authorized for media release on behalf ofthe BIA, Branch of Wildland Fire Management (DFWFM). For cases that may include multiple agency jurisdictions, these releases are also approved for use. The DFWFM media release template and approved supporting fire messages canbe found online (https://www.bia.gov/bia/ots/dwfm/media). Wildland Fire Prevention Fire Operations, Fire Use, and Fuels Management Burned Area Emergency Response Training • Fire danger alerts • Fire restrictions/ burn bans • Burn permits • Fire preparedness activities • WeTip • FIREWISE • Arson prevention • Youth Fire Setter Intervention Program • Seasonal and holiday wildfire precautions • Outdoor cooking • Debris burning • Campfire safety • Fireworks safety • Equipment/vehicle safety • Other wildland fire prevention message specific toa home unit that may target a cause of wildland fire starts • Evacuations • Road closures • Smoke in area • Fire equipment use • IMT mobilizations/ status updates • Multiple objectives being met using natural wildfires. • Prescribed fire planned/completed • Mechanical treatment planned/completed • Annual refresher announcements • BAER status updates • Closures • Treatment planned/ completed • Training season • Administratively- determined-firefighter announcements • Special training sessions • Indian Country Fitness Challenge
Chapter 7 Safety and Risk Management Introduction The primary means by which we prevent accidents in wildland fire operations is through aggressive risk management. Our safety philosophy acknowledges that while the ideal level of risk maybe zero, a hazard-free work environment isnot a reasonable or achievable goal in fire operations. Through organized, comprehensive, and systematic risk management, we will determine the acceptable level of risk that allows usto provide for safety yet still achieve fire operations objectives. Risk management is intended to minimize the number of injuries or fatalities experienced by wildland firefighters. Policy Firefighter and public safety isour first priority. All fire management plans and activities must reflect this commitment. The commitment toand accountability for safety isa joint responsibility ofall firefighters, managers, and administrators. Every supervisor, employee, and volunteer is responsible for following safe work practices and procedures, as well as identifying and reporting unsafe conditions. Agency-specific safety policy documents: • BLM – BLM Handbook 1112-1, DOI Occupational Safety and Health Program – Field Manual • NPS – DO-50B and RM-50B Occupational Safety and Health Program (https://www.nps.gov/subjects/policy/directors-orders.htm) • FWS – Service Manual 240FW 1, Safety Program Management • FS – FSM 5100; FSH-6709.11 Health and Safety Code Handbook For additional safety guidance, refer to: • Incident Response Pocket Guide (IRPG, PMS 461, NFES 1077) ○ FS – USDA Forest Service Risk Management website. Guiding Principles The primary means by which we implement command decisions and maintain unity of action is through the use of common principles of operations. These principles guide our fundamental wildland fire management practices, behaviors, and customs, and are mutually understood at every level of command. They include Risk Management, Standard Firefighting Orders and Watch Out Situations, LCES and the Downhill Line Construction Checklist. These principles are fundamental tohow we perform fire operations and are intended to improve decision making and firefighter safety. They are not absolute rules. They require judgment in application. Goal The goal ofthe fire safety program isto provide direction and guidance for safe and effective management inall activities. Safety isthe responsibility of everyone assigned to wildland fire and must be practiced atall operational levels from the national fire director, state/regional director, and unit manager to employees inthe field. Agency administrators need to stress that firefighter and public safety always takes precedence over property and resource loss. Coordination between the fire management staff and unit safety officer(s) is essential in achieving this objective. Definitions Safety: A measure ofthe degree of freedom from risk or conditions that can cause death, physical harm, or equipment or property damage. Hazard: A condition or situation that exists within the working environment capable of causing physical harm, injury, or damage. Risk: The likelihood or possibility of hazardous consequences in terms of severity or probability. Risk management: The process whereby management decisions are made and actions taken concerning control of hazards and acceptance of remaining risk.
Risk Management Process Fire operations risk management is outlined inthe IRPG. The five-step process provides firefighters and fire managers a simple, universal, and consistent wayto practice risk management by: • Establishing situation awareness by identifying hazards. • Assessing hazard potential. • Developing hazard controls and making risk management decisions. • Implementing hazard controls. • Supervising implementation and evaluating effectiveness. Job Hazard Analysis/Risk Assessment A completed job hazard analysis (JHA)/risk assessment (RA) is required for: • "High-risk" work activities, projects, or tasks where unintended outcomes could result in serious injuries, illnesses, fatalities, or significant property damage. • Jobs that may require the employee touse non-standard personal protective equipment (PPE). • Changes in equipment, work environment, conditions, policies, or materials. Supervisors and appropriate line managers must ensure that established JHAs/RAs are reviewed and signed prior toany non-routine task orat the beginning ofthe fire season. • BLM – Additional RA information canbe obtained onthe BLM Risk Management website. • FWS – See also 240FW 1, Exhibit 1, Job Hazard Assessment (https://www.fws.gov/policy/e1240fw1.html). • FS – JHAs must include a description ofthe emergency medical procedures, identification ofkey individuals, and actions that will be taken to ensure prompt and effective medical care and evacuation. See FSH 6709.11, section 21.1, for more information. TheFS Operational Risk Management Guide, process, and forms for conducting anRA canbe found onthe Risk Management website. Work/Rest To mitigate fatigue, agency administrators, fire managers, supervisors, incident commanders (IC), and individual firefighters should plan for and ensure that all personnel are provided a minimum 2:1 work/rest ratio (for every 2 hours of work or travel, provide 1 hour of sleep and/or rest). Work shifts that exceed 16 hours and/or consecutive days that donot meet the2:1 work/rest ratio should bethe exception. When this occurs, the following actions are required: • Personnel will resume 2:1 work/rest ratio as quickly as possible. • TheIC or agency administrator will justify work shifts that exceed 16 hours and/or consecutive days that donot meet 2:1 work to rest ratio. Justification will be documented inthe daily incident records, made available tothe employee bythe finance section/local unit, and must include mitigation measures used to reduce fatigue. • The time officer’s/unit leader’s approval ofthe Emergency Firefighter Time Report (OF-288), or other agency pay document, certifies that the required documentation ison file andno further documentation is required for pay purposes. The work/rest guidelines donot apply to aircraft pilots assigned toan incident. Pilots must abide by applicable Federal Aviation Administration guidelines, or agency policy if more restrictive. Length of Assignment Assignment Definition An assignment is defined asthe time period (days) between the first full operational period excluding travel, and the last operational period. The last operational period isthe last full day worked which excludes all travel. Assignments include prescribed fire and fuels treatments. Length of Assignment Standard assignment length is14 days, exclusive of travel from andto the home unit, with possible extensions identified below. Time spent in staging and preposition status counts toward the14-day limit, regardless ofpay status, for all personnel, including incident management teams (IMT). Contracted aircraft are not restricted by length of assignment. In order to limit disruption to operations, reduce strain onthe ordering system and reduce unnecessary mobilization and demobilization of these high-cost resources, exclusive-use aviation personnel are encouraged to utilize a personnel rotation schedule that meets staffing criteria required ofthe resource. When numerous internal rotations of staffing Exclusive Use aircraft occur, consideration for aircraft exchange shall be given by aviation managers and coordinators. Requests for such an exchange shall be coordinated with all parties involved to include the aircraft manager, IMTor hosting unit, GACC, NICC and applicable National Aircraft
Coordinator. The ability to grant such requests during high fire activity or planning levels maybe limited dueto extenuating circumstances. 14-day Scenario Days OffTo assist in mitigating fatigue, days off are allowed during and after assignments. Agency administrators (incident host or home unit) may authorize time off supplementary to mandatory days off requirements. The authority to grant aday off with pay lies within 5U.S.C. 6104, 5CFR 610.301-306, and56 Comp. Gen. Decision 393 (1977). After completion ofa 14-day assignment and return tothe home unit, three mandatory days off will be provided (also referred toas “3 after 14”). Days off must occur onthe calendar days immediately following the return travel in order tobe charged tothe incident (See Section 12.1-2.) (5U.S.C. 6104, 5CFR 610.301-306, and56 Comp. Gen. Decision 393 (1977). For off-site/remote assignments, days off must occur onthe calendar days immediately following last operational shift worked. Ifthe next day(s) upon return from an incident is/area regular workday(s), a paid day(s) off will be authorized. Regulations may preclude authorizing this for non-National Wildfire Coordinating Group (NWCG) and State/local employees. Pay entitlement, including administrative leave fora paid day(s) off, cannot be authorized onthe individual’s regular day(s) offat their home unit. Agencies will apply holiday pay regulations, as appropriate. A paid day off is recorded on home unit time records according to agency requirements. Administratively Determined (AD) personnel are not entitled to paid day(s) off upon release from the incident orat their point of hire. Contract resources are not entitled to paid day(s) off upon release from the incident orat their point of hire. • DOI – After completion ofa 14-day assignment and return travel, the mandatory days off will be charged to administrative leave (code 061, Weather and Safety) if they fall ona regularly scheduled workday. Home unit agency administrators may authorize additional day(s) off with compensation to further mitigate fatigue. If authorized, home unit program funds will be used. Assignment Extension Extensions beyond 14-day assignments should be made sparingly. Consider the health, readiness, and capability of incident personnel prior to authorizing back-to-back assignments. The health and safety of incident personnel and resources will notbe compromised under any circumstance. Assignments maybe extended when: • Life and property are imminently threatened. • Suppression objectives are close to being met. • A military battalion is assigned. • Replacement resources are unavailable or have not yet arrived. • The assignment isa planned event (e.g., fuels treatment, prescribed fire implementation) with fatigue mitigations (e.g., shorter workdays, adequate rest in hotels, etc.). Upon completion ofthe standard 14-day assignment, an extension ofup toan additional 14 days maybe allowed (fora total ofup to30 days, inclusive of mandatory days off, and exclusive of travel). 21-day Scenario A21-day assignment is exclusive of travel from andto home unit. Time spent in staging and preposition status counts toward the21-day assignment, regardless ofpay status, for all personnel, including IMTs. 30-day Scenario
An assignment longer than 22 days is exclusive of travel from andto home unit. Time spent in staging and preposition status counts toward the assignment, regardless ofpay status, for all personnel, including IMTs. Foran assignment exceeding 21 days, two mandatory days off will be provided prior tothe 22nd dayof the assignment. Foran assignment exceeding 21 days, two mandatory days off will be provided prior tothe 22nd dayof the assignment. Upon completion ofthe assignment and return tothe home unit, three mandatory days off will be provided. Contracts, incident blanket purchase agreements (I-BPA), and emergency equipment rental agreements (EERA) should be reviewed for appropriate pay requirements and length of assignment. Ifthe contract, I-BPA, or EERA donot address this, the incident Finance/Administration Section chief orthe procurement official should be consulted asto whether compensation fora day off is appropriate. Single Resource/Kind Extensions The section chief orIC will identify the need for assignment extension and will obtain the affected resource’s concurrence. The section chief and affected resource will acquire and document the home unit supervisor’s approval. TheIC approves the extension. Ifa convened Geographic Multi-Agency Coordinating Group (GMAC) orthe National Multi-Agency Coordinating Group (NMAC) directs, theIC approves only after GMAC/NMAC concurrence. Ifthe potential exists for reassignment to another incident during the extension, the home unit supervisor and the affected resource will be advised and must concur prior to reassignment. Incident Management Team Extensions Incident management team extensions areto be negotiated between the incident agency administrator, theIC, and the GMAC/NMAC, if directed. Maximum Consecutive Days Worked – Home Unit During extended periods of activity atthe home unit, personnel will have a minimum of2 days offin any21-day period. Home unit is defined asthe duty station. Supervisors must manage work schedules for initial attack, dispatch, and incident support personnel during extended incident situations. • FS – During extended periods of activity in support of local fire management, personnel will have a minimum of2 days offin any14-day period. Driving Standard Employees driving motor vehicles are responsible for the proper care, operation, maintenance, and protection ofthe vehicle, as well as obeying all Federal and State laws. The use of Government-owned, -rented, or -leased motor vehicles isfor official business only. Unauthorized useis prohibited. General Driving Policy • Employees must have a valid State driver’s license in their possession for the appropriate vehicle class before operating the vehicle. Operating a Government-owned or -rental vehicle without a valid State driver’s license is prohibited. • All drivers whose job duties require the use ofa motor vehicle will receive initial defensive driver training within three months of entering on duty and refresher driver training every three years thereafter. ○ BLM/FS – Driver training is required prior to operating a vehicle for official purposes. ○ BIA – BIA Motor Vehicle Policy (25IAM), relating toBIA/Tribal fire personnel, does not require defensive driving training. All drivers are required to have completed BL300 and RT301 in order to operate any vehicle in performance of duties for wildland fire. • All traffic violations or parking tickets will bethe operator’s responsibility. • All driving requiring a commercial driver’s license (CDL) will be performed in accordance with applicable Department of Transportation regulations. • Drivers and all passengers are required touse seat belts atall times when the motor vehicle isin motion. • BLM – BLM Form 1112-11 will be used to document every BLM fire and fire aviation employee’s authorization to drive Government vehicles orto drive private or rental vehicles for Government business. Employees are required to self-certify their physical ability to operate vehicles which they are authorized touse. Drivers of vehicles that require aCDL maybe required to have additional driver, medical, and fitness testing as required by local and/or State laws. Employees will immediately inform their supervisor and update
BLM Form 1112-11if a change in medical condition impedes their driving ability orif a State driving privilege is restricted for any reason. Supervisors will review the updated form and take appropriate action as necessary. • BLM – Employees, volunteers, contractors, and cooperators are prohibited from using any mobile voice/data communication or electronic data retrieval device while operating a government owned, leased, or rented vehicle or while operating a personally-owned vehicle for official government business, and are further prohibited from using any government-owned mobile communication or data retrieval device while operating a personally-owned vehicle, except where permitted by state law and in hands-free mode. Government purchased two-way radios are exempt from this requirement. The use ofany of these devices during an emergency situation (immediate threat to life) is limited tothe extent necessary to convey vital information. When there isa passenger inthe vehicle and the vehicle isin motion, the passenger shall manage communications to prevent driver distraction. • NPS – The safest wayto usea cellular telephone while driving isto pull over and stop the vehicle. When this isnot possible, all employees, volunteers, youth program enrollees orany individual acting on behalf ofthe National Park Service are prohibited from using a cellular orcar telephone unless they canbe operated ina hands-free operation mode. In addition, Executive Order 13513 of October 1, 2009, states, “Federal employees shall not engage in text messaging (a) when driving GOV, or when driving POV while on official Government business, or (b) when using electronic equipment supplied bythe Government while driving.” • NPS – For NPS employees engaged in activities other than wildfire or prescribed fire, refer tothe current NPS Official Travel Driving Policy (Policy Memorandum 13-01). • FWS – Supervisors authorize drivers using FWS Form 3-2267. More information is available in321 FW1 Authorization, Training, and Safety Requirements for Motor Vehicle/Equipment Operators. • FWS – The safest wayto usea cell phone or other electronic device while driving isto pull over and stop the vehicle oruse a passenger to manage communications. When this isnot possible, all operators acting on behalf ofthe FWS may use cell phones or other electronic devices while operating vehicles ONLY in hands-free mode andas allowed by their State or local authority. Operators must not text while operating vehicles and pre- program electronic devices, such as Global Positioning System (GPS) units, before moving the vehicle. Emergency communications using atwo-way radio is exempt. • FS – Policy requires all operators of Government-owned, or -leased vehicles to have a Forest Service issued Operator’s Identification Card (OF-346) indicating the type of vehicles or equipment the holder is authorized and qualified to operate. • FS – Drivers shall not engage in cellular phone or mobile radio communications while the vehicle isin motion unless actively engaged inan emergency such as wildland firefighting. During non-emergency situations, the driver shall identify a safe location to stop the vehicle and then engage in cellular phone or mobile radio communications. These restrictions apply whether ornot hands-free technology is available. Employees operating a motor vehicle that meets anyof the following criteria must possess a valid CDL with all applicable endorsements: • Hasa gross combination weight rating or gross combination weight of26,001 pounds or more, whichever is greater, inclusive ofa towed unit(s) with a gross vehicle weight rating or gross vehicle weight of more than 10,000 pounds, whichever is greater; or • Hasa gross vehicle weight rating or gross vehicle weight of26,001 pounds or more, whichever is greater; or • Is designed to transport 16or more passengers, including the driver; or • Isof any size andis used inthe transportation of hazardous materials. Hazardous materials means any material that has been designated as hazardous under 49U.S.C. 5103 andis required tobe placarded under subpart Fof 49CFR part 172or any quantity ofa material listed asa select agent or toxin in42 CFR part 73. • DOI – Employees under the age of21 that possess aCDL may operate commercial motor vehicles (CMV) across State lines for interstate commerce purposes under the following conditions: ○ Drivers with aCDL may operate aCMV in accordance with the issuing authority (i.e., the State) that issued the CDL and must comply with the issuing authority’sCMV operational requirements and any special requirements and endorsements applicable tothe CMV license classification ofthe CDL holder; and ○ Supervisors must annually establish and document that those drivers have a valid driver’s license (i.e., that the license has not been suspended, revoked, canceled, or that he/she has not been otherwise disqualified from holding a license – 485DM 16.3D (1)), have the ability to operate the vehicle(s) safely inthe operational environment assigned (485DM 16.3B (2)), and review and validate the employee’s driving record (485DM 16.3D (4)). Non-Incident Operations Driving Refer tothe current driving standards for each individual agency.
• BIA – Per Indian Affairs Manual (IAM), part 25, chapter 4: employees will not exceed 8 hours of driving time (behind the wheel), to include useof specialized equipment, during a16-hour duty day. Mobilization and Demobilization To manage fatigue, every effort should be made to avoid off-unit mobilization (excluding initial attack response) and demobilization travel between 2200 hours and 0500 hours. Incident Operations Driving This policy addresses driving by personnel actively engaged in wildland fire orall-hazards activities, including driving while in support, mobilization, and demobilization toan assigned incident; or during initial attack fire response (includes time required to control the fire and travel toa rest location). • Agency resources assigned toan incident or engaged in initial attack fire response will adhere tothe current agency work/rest policy for determining length of duty day. • No driver will drive (behind the wheel) more than 10 hours within any duty-day. • Multiple drivers ina single vehicle may drive upto the duty-day limitation provided no driver exceeds the individual driving (behind the wheel) time limitation of10 hours. • A driver shall drive only if they have hadat least 8 consecutive hours off duty before beginning a shift. Exception tothe minimum off-duty hour requirement is allowed when essential to: ○ Accomplish immediate and critical suppression objectives. ○ Address immediate and critical firefighter or public safety issues. • As stated inthe current agency work/rest policy, documentation of mitigation measures used to reduce fatigue is required for drivers who exceed 16-hour work shifts. This is required regardless of whether the driver was still compliant with the10-hour individual (behind-the-wheel) driving time limitations. Fire Vehicle Operation Standards Operators ofall vehicles must abide by State traffic regulations and agency policy and must operate within the limits specified bythe vehicle manufacturer such as tire maximum speed ratings and gross vehicle weight ratings. Management Controls to Mitigate Risks to Responders Management controls, engineering controls, equipment guards, and administrative procedures are the first line of defense against exposing an employee toa hazard. Personal protective equipment will be used to protect employees against hazards that exist after all management controls are exhausted. Wildland Fire Field Attire Polyester, polypropylene, and nylon materials are not tobe worn, because most synthetic fibers melt when exposed to flame or extreme radiant heat. Personnel should wear only undergarments made of100 percent orthe highest possible content of natural fibers, aramid, or other flame-resistant materials. Personal Protective Equipment All personnel are required touse personal protective equipment (PPE) appropriate for their duties and/oras identified in JHAs/RAs. Employees must be trained touse safety equipment effectively. Flame-resistant clothing should be cleaned or replaced whenever soiled, especially when soiled with petroleum products. Flame-resistant clothing will be replaced when the fabric isso worn asto reduce the protection capability ofthe garment oris so faded asto significantly reduce the desired visibility qualities. Any modification toPPE that reduces its protection capability, such as iron-on logos, and stagging of pants, isan unacceptable practice and will notbe allowed. Required Fireline PPE • Wildland fire boots • Fire shelter M-2002, Forest Service specification 5100-606 • Helmet with chinstrap; must comply with NFPA 1977 • Goggles/safety glasses (as identified by JHAs/RAs) • Ear plugs/hearing protection • Long-sleeved, flame-resistant shirt (yellow recommended); must comply with NFPA 1977 ○ NPS/FS – Shirt used by USFS personnel must meet Forest Service Specification 5100-91or comply with NFPA 1977. • Flame-resistant trousers; must comply with NFPA 1977 ○ NPS/FS – Trousers used by USFS personnel must meet Forest Service Specification 5100-92or comply with NFPA 1977.
• Leather or leather/flame-resistant combination gloves. Flame-resistant flight gloves or NFPA-1977-compliant driving gloves canbe used by heavy equipment operators, drivers, and fireline supervisors when not using fireline hand tools. ○ NPS/FS – Gloves used by USFS personnel must meet Forest Service Specification 6170-5or comply with NFPA 1977. • Additional PPEas identified by local conditions, Safety Data Sheet (SDS), orJHA/RA. Wildland Fire Boot Standard Personnel assigned to wildland fires must wear a minimum of8-inch-high, lace-type, exterior-leather work boots with melt-resistant, lug soles. The8-inch height requirement is measured from the bottom ofthe boot heel tothe topof the boot. Alaska is exempt from the lug sole requirement. All boots that meet the wildland fire boot standard as described above are required for firefighting and fireline visits, considered non-specialized PPE, and will be purchased bythe employee (including AD/EFF) prior to employment. The agencies have authorized payment ofa boot stipend. See agency specific guidance for implementation. Fire Shelters Fire shelter M-2002, Forest Service specification 5100-606is required for all wildland firefighters. For more information, refer tothe NWCG Fire Shelter and Personal Protective Equipment Subcommittee webpage. Training in inspection and deployment of fire shelters will be provided prior to issuance. Fire shelters donot have a shelf life; serviceability depends onthe shelter’s condition. Firefighters will inspect (https://www.fs.usda.gov/t- d/php/library_card.php?p_num=1151%202301P) their shelter atthe beginning of each fire season and periodically throughout the year to ensure serviceability. Regular sized fire shelters manufactured prior to 2006 should be removed from service. Fire shelters manufactured prior to 2006 are identified as having a white or pink paper insert label. If replacement fire shelters are not readily available, replacement fire shelters should be ordered immediately and pre-2006 shelters removed from service when replacements are available. Pre-2006 fire shelters should be destroyed, or clearly marked asnon-operational shelters, if retained. Training shelters will be deployed at required Wildland Fire Safety Training Annual Refresher (RT-130). No live fire exercises for the purpose of fire shelter deployment training will be conducted. Fire shelters will be carried ina readily accessible manner byall line personnel. The deployment of shelters will notbe used asa tactical tool. Supervisors and firefighters must never rely on fire shelters instead of using well-defined escape routes and safety zones. When deployed ona fire, fire shelters will be left in place ifit is safe todo soand notbe removed pending approval of authorized investigators. Firefighters must report the shelter deployment incident to their supervisor as soon as possible. Head Protection All personal inthe fire area will wear helmets atall times. Helmets must be equipped with a chinstrap which must be fastened while riding in, orin the vicinity of, helicopters. Acceptable helmets for fireline use must meet NFPA 1977. • BLM – Helmets and hats used for protection from impact of falling and flying objects and from limited electric shock and burn must meet the specifications of American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Z89.1. Equivalent helmet meeting ANSI Z89.1 type 1, class Gor NFPA 1977. Helmets consist ofthe shell and the suspension, which work together asa system. Both components require frequent inspection and maintenance (https://www.nwcg.gov/committees/fire-shelter-and-personal-protective-equipment- subcommittee). Eye and Face Protection The following positions require the wearing ofeye protection (meets ANSI Z87.1 standards): • Nozzle operator • Chainsaw operator/faller ○ Eye protection will be worn during all chainsaw operations including cleaning and fueling (meeting ANSI Z87.1). Steel mesh safety goggles are allowed during falling, bucking, and brushing operations. Face shields are only required where face protection has been identified ina Job Hazard Analysis/Risk Assessment (JHA/RA). Face shields must meet ANSI Z87.1. • Helibase and ramp personnel • Wildland fire chemical mixing personnel • Other positions identified within JHAs/RAs
Full-face protection inthe form ofa face shield in compliance with ANSI Z87.1 shall be worn when working inany position where face protection has been identified as required inthe job-specific JHA/RA (batch mixing for Terra- Torch®, power sharpener operators, etc.). Hearing Protection Personnel exposed to noise levels in excess of85 dB must wear agency-provided hearing protection. Personnel include, but are not limited to: • Chainsaw operators/fallers • Pump operators • Helibase and aircraft ramp personnel • Wildland fire chemical mixing personnel Other duties may require hearing protection as identified ina specific JHA/RA. The Code of Federal Regulations (29CFR 1910.95) requires employers to administer a continuing, effective hearing conservation program. Consult with local safety and health personnel for specifics regarding unit hearing conservation programs. Neck Protection Face and neck shrouds are not required PPE. The use of shrouds isnot required and should beas a result of onsite risk analysis. If used, face and neck shrouds shall meet the requirements ofFS Specification 5100-601or NFPA 1977. Shrouds should be positioned ina manner that allows for immediate use. For additional information see MTDC Tech Tip Improved Face and Neck Shroud for Wildland Firefighters, 2004 (0451-2323-MTDC). Leg Protection All chainsaw operators will wear leg protection that meets the National Fire Protection Association Standard (NFPA) 1977: Standard on Protective Clothing and Equipment for Wildland Fire Fighting and Urban Interface Fire Fighting. Swampers should wear leg protection when the need is demonstrated bya risk analysis considering the proximity tothe sawyer, slope, fuel type, etc. All other chainsaw leg protection must be removed from service. Chainsaw leg protection shall be maintained according to manufacturer instructions. Respiratory Protection Respiratory protection should only be implemented once engineering and administrative controls are exhausted. The need for respiratory protection during wildland fire operations must be determined by each agency. The requirements for respirator use are found in29 CFR Part 1910.134. Only NIOSH-approved respirators shall be used. Managers and supervisors will not knowingly place wildland firefighters in positions where exposure to toxic gases or chemicals that cannot be mitigated and would require the use of self-contained breathing apparatus. Managers will not sign cooperative fire protection agreements that would commit wildland firefighters to situations where exposure to toxic gases or chemicals would require the use of self-contained breathing apparatus. • FS – FSM 5130, Self-Contained Breathing Apparatus: Wildland firefighters may use only SCBA which are compliant with NFPA 1981, Standard on Open-Circuit Self-Contained Breathing Apparatus (SCBA) for Emergency Services. SCBA may only be used when contaminants from vehicle, dump, structure, or other non- wildland fuel fire cannot be avoided while meeting wildland fire suppression objectives (29CFR 1910.134, Respiratory Protection). If such an apparatus isnot available, avoid exposure to smoke from these sources. The acquisition, training, proper use, employee health surveillance programs, inspection, storage, and maintenance of respiratory protection equipment must comply with applicable NFPA standards and29 CFR 1910.134 and be justified bya JHAor RA. Where the acquisition and use ofan SCBA is approved, itmay be carried only ona fire engine; and its use must be consistent with FSM 5130. Specialized orNon-Standard Personal Protective Equipment Specialized PPE not routinely supplied bythe agency (e.g., prescription safety glasses; static-resistant clothing; cold-weather, flame-resistant outerwear, etc.) required to perform a task safely must be procured in accordance with agency direction and supported bya JHA/RA. AJHA/RA must be completed and reviewed bythe unit safety officer; supervisor approval is required. Items must meet agency and industry standards for the intended use. Cold-weather, flame-resistant outerwear shall bein compliance with NFPA 1977. All cold-weather innerwear should be composed of100 percent—orthe highest possible content of—natural fibers (cotton, wool or silk) or other flame-resistant material, such as aramid.
High-Visibility Safety Apparel In order to meet 23CFR 634, high-visibility apparel should be worn whenever a firefighter is working onor inthe public roadway right-of-way. Employees must wear high-visibility safety apparel that meets ANSI/ISEA 107, class 2or 3, or ANSI/ISEA 207. Exceptions The high-visibility safety apparel should notbe worn if: • There isa reasonable chance that the employee maybe exposed to flames, high heat, or hazardous materials. • The high-visibility garment hinders an employee’s ability todo their job because it prevents necessary motion or because it limits access to necessary equipment, such as radios or fire shelters. Additional information is available inthe National Technology and Development Program (NTDP) formerly known as Missoula Technology and Development Center (MTDC) report, High-Visibility Garments and Worker Safety on Roadways (1251-2818P-MTDC). Fireline Safety Incident Briefings Fire managers must ensure that safety briefings are occurring throughout the fire organization, and that safety factors are addressed through theIC or their designee and communicated toall incident personnel at operational briefings. The identification and location of escape routes and safety zones must be stressed. A briefing checklist canbe found inthe Incident Response Pocket Guide (IRPG). LCES – A System for Operational Safety LCES will be used inall operational briefings and tactical operations asper the Incident Response Pocket Guide (IRPG). • L – Lookout(s) • C – Communication(s) • E – Escape Route(s) • S – Safety Zone(s) Right to Refuse Risk Every individual has the right to turn down unsafe assignments. When an individual feels an assignment is unsafe, they also have the obligation to identify, tothe degree possible, safety alternatives for completing that assignment. The IRPG contains a process for properly refusing risk. Aerial Drop Safety Considerations • Maintain prompt communications with aerial resources. Prioritize air-to-ground as appropriate. • Establish a designated monitor for air-to-ground communications. Specific drops may not be accomplished unless communications are maintained, and clearance is assured. Keep informed ofthe aerial firefighting objectives, tempo, and aircraft type. • Anticipate when line clearance maybe requested. Tempo can change very quickly as aerial resources become available. Anticipate the clearance requirement based onthe volume of delivery. • Evaluate the environment for gravity hazards (tree limbs, rocks, logs, and dispensed retardant/water). Broken trees and tree limbs, rolling rocks, and logs all move with gravity. If clearance is downhill ofthe drop, heightened awareness is warranted. • If clearance is impractical, where fuels and/or terrain obstruct lateral clearance, notify aerial supervisor orthe initial attack resource immediately. • If escape isnot possible, lie face-down with head toward incoming aircraft with hardhat in place. Hold hand tool away from your body, andif possible, grasp something firm to prevent being carried or rolled about bythe dropped liquid. Smoke and Carbon Monoxide Smoke isone ofthe potential risks faced by wildland firefighters. Identify and document site-specific hazards and mitigations to reduce firefighter exposure to smoke and potential carbon monoxide inthe JHA/RA. Evaluate and balance all risks associated with the operational objectives. From an incident management perspective, smoke impacts need tobe analyzed andan RA completed using the Incident Action Plan (IAP) Safety Analysis (ICS-215A) worksheet. For additional information, reference NWCG Memorandum EB-M-12-006, Monitoring and Mitigating Exposure to Carbon Monoxide and Particulates at Incident Base Camps (https://www.nwcg.gov/executive-board/correspondence). Consider ordering air resource advisors (ARA, technical specialist) when smoke impacts areof concern inthe ICS-215A. Ordering ARAs tothe
maximum extent practicable as identified bythe 2019 Dingell Acton all type 1 fires; consider assigning ARAs on type 2 fires. Location of Fire Camps and Plans to Remain in Place Fire camps should be located in areas that will service the incident for the long term without having to relocate. Dueto such factors as extreme fire behavior, fire camp locations might be compromised. ICs are tobe especially vigilant to quickly identify situations that may put their fire camp(s) orany other adjacent fire camps in jeopardy. As such, planning for evacuation and/or remain in place actions should be considered. Evacuation plans ata minimum shall include: • Documented risk assessment • Trigger points • Egress routes • Transportation for all personnel • Accountability for all personnel • Individuals not meeting NWCG Standards for Wildland Fire Position Qualifications, PMS 310-1, qualifications are considered escorted visitors. ○ FS – Ata minimum, plans shall also include:  ICP protection strategy referenced inthe IAP.  Livability considerations, including air quality index guidelines, functionality of location and facilities, and safety factors for post-burn conditions. Standard Safety Flagging The following flagging is recommended for wildland fire activities: • Escape routes – hot-pink flagging marked “Escape Route” (NFES 0566). Crews with colorblind members may wish to carry and utilize fluorescent chartreuse flagging (NFES 2396). • Hazards – yellow with black diagonal stripes, 1-inch wide (NFES 0267). Ifthe above recommendations are not utilized onan incident, the incident will need to identify the selected color and make it known toall firefighters. Emergency Medical Planning and Services To provide for quick and effective response, all units (including dispatch centers) will develop and implement plans that specify emergency procedures, actions, and roles/responsibilities to ensure injured personnel are provided prompt and effective medical care and evacuation. Incident Medical Emergency Management Planning In 2010, NWCG approved the standardized incident emergency protocol developed bythe Dutch Creek Serious Accident Task Team and issued direction that these emergency medical procedures be adopted byall IMTs during daily operations. • Although some ofthe procedures are specific to larger type 1and type 2 complexity incidents when key unit leader positions are filled, these same procedures and protocols canbe adapted for local unit use when managing type 5, 4, and3 complexity incidents, as well as during normal field operations. Local unit emergency medical plans must take into account all types and management levels of incidents. • All IMTs will use the standard Medical Incident Report (MIR) in their medical plan and communication protocols. The MIR is found inthe IRPG under Emergency Medical Care Guidelines (red pages) and within the Medical Plan (ICS-206-WF). To achieve successful medical response, agency administrators will ensure that their units have completed the following items prior to each field season: • A medical emergency plan that identifies medical evacuation options, local/county/State/Federal resource capabilities, capacities, ordering procedures, cooperative agreements, role of dispatch centers, and key contacts or liaisons. • Standardized incident and communication center protocols identified inthe Medical Incident Report inthe IRPG. • For incidents that require the preparation ofan IAP, ICS-206-WF, will be used. Air Ambulance Coordination Unit- and state-/regional-level fire program managers should ensure that procedures, processes, and/or agreements for use of local and regional air ambulance services are stated in writing and effectively coordinated between the fire programs, the dispatch/logistics centers, and the service providers. These procedures, processes, and/or agreements
should address contact frequencies, coordinate format requirements, and identify capabilities/limitations ofthe air ambulance (e.g., night flying, unimproved helispots, and weather restrictions). Incident Emergency Medical Services Incident medical information canbe found onthe NWCG Emergency Medical Committee website. NWCG has published Clinical Treatment Guidelines for Wildland Fire Medical Units, PMS 551. These guidelines establish a national approach for medical care during large incidents that expand the typical emergency management services (EMS) scope of practice to include the mission of managing and maintaining the health and wellness of wildland fire personnel. Home units that choose to utilize and support higher-level medical responders to provide medical support for internal agency medical emergencies (beyond basic first aid/CPR) maydo so; however, certification and credentialing must follow respective State laws and protocols unless there is other agency direction. Burn Treatment Guidelines The following standards will be used when any firefighter sustains burn injuries, regardless of agency jurisdiction. All significant burns should be treated asa medical emergency and after on-site medical response, the patient should be transferred toa higher level of care. In most cases, this will bethe nearest emergency department (e.g., hospital emergency room) receive an initial evaluation. After initial medical stabilization, and evaluation are completed, the agency administrator or designee having jurisdiction for the incident and/or firefighter representative (e.g., crew boss, medical unit leader, compensations for injury specialist, etc.) should discuss and coordinate with the attending physician to ensure that the injured firefighter understands the plan of care. The spectrum of burn care treatment is complex and can include only wound care and local follow up, to consultation by phone or with videos toa burn center, or even immediate transfer toa burn center. Burn centers are specialized hospitals that provide surgical and other interventions to burn patients. The American Burn Association (https://ameriburn.org/resources/) has created certain transfer criteria that areto be used by referring physicians. Agency administrators and the patient should understand that burns develop over days and the full extent or exact definitive treatment that will eventually be required may not be able tobe determined onthe initial emergency department visit. Ifa patient is discharged from the emergency department, the patient needs to understand when to follow upto have the burn reevaluated. This referral or follow-up care recommendation is very important for OWCP and should be specified inthe discharge documentation. Furthermore, this documentation must be signed bya physician (https://www.dol.gov/owcp/dfec/regs/compliance/DFECfolio/FECA-PT3/#30100). Workers’ compensation benefits maybe denied inthe event the employee seeks follow-up without a referral from the attending physician after already being seen bya medical provider. A report prepared bya physicians’ assistant or nurse practitioner must be countersigned bya physician tobe accepted as medical evidence. The agency administrator or designee for the incident will coordinate with the employee’s home unit to identify a workers’ compensation liaison to assist the injured employee with workers’ compensation claims and procedures. The flowsheet below and emergency department information for attendings canbe used as well. See the Emergency Medical Committee website for additional information.
Burn Injury Care Guidelines Thank you for taking care ofour wildland firefighters! The information below is provided to help clinicians provide the best care possible for this unique work force. Demographics for Wildland Firefighters • Wildland firefighters area diverse group, but generally are under 35 years ofage. • They LOVE their job and want to return from an injury as soon as possible. • They tend tobe very stoic individuals that are accustomed to physical labor. • They are away from home most ofthe fire season and are often stationed in another state. Occupational Hazards which could result in Impaired Burn Wound Healing and Potential Infection • Dirty, dusty, smoky work environment. • Lack ofa clean environment to change dressings. • Living ina tent and large communal camp settings. • Extreme heat and sometimes cold environments. • Lifting and carrying heavy loads (upto 85lbs.) long distances. • Working in remote and isolated sites. • Extensive walking and hiking with significant exertional stress. • Long hours with limited and disrupted sleep. • Hunger and irregular meals, dehydration. • Extreme stress in rapid pull-out emergency situations whether fire, falling rocks, or falling trees. Important Information for Emergency Department Providers • Most wildland firefighters donot have a primary care provider (PCP) at home and are working remote from where they live.
• A referral paper trail is important for our workmen’s compensation claims. If they are discharged, please include where and approximately when to follow up. Most EMR discharge instructions will suffice so long asit includes the service (e.g., wound care, surgery, burn center). A specific physician name isnot needed but please donot put “PRN.” Without this referral, significant delays can occur. • If local follow-upfor a minor injury is needed, please provide specific instructions as transport and/or alternative living conditions may need tobe arranged bythe fire personnel. • Ifthe injured firefighter isnot told specifically that they cannot return tothe fireline, they will doso. Please List any specific instructions you feel are indicated (e.g., daily dressing changes, donot use right hand until seen at wound care, etc.). Please Donot just state “light duty.” • Wildland firefighters maybe accompanied byan agency representative to help them with transport/instructions and act asa liaison with the fire, home unit, and family for the patient. • The fire may have a medical unit that can help with some minor care. These units consist of EMTs ina remote area who only have access to basic over-the-counter medications. • Telehealth burn follow upor follow up with a burn center is preferred if available. ○ BLM – For emergency assistance with burn injuries, contact the BLM duty officer at208-387-5876. Explosives, Munitions, and Unexploded Ordnance When encountering explosives, munitions, unexploded ordnance (UXO), or suspected UXO, never pick up, handle, uncover, or touch suspected explosives or military munitions. Retreat and secure the area from entry. Immediately notify the local dispatch office and gather as much information as possible from a safe distance. Never compromise safety to collect information. • Location ofthe explosive/munitions using amap, GPS coordinates, or landmarks (useof aGPS receiver is acceptable because itis a receive-only device). • Picture ofthe explosive ifit canbe obtained from a safe distance. • Name and contact information of person discovering the explosive/munitions. • Condition ofthe explosive/munitions (e.g., buried, partially exposed, fully exposed, deteriorated, or punctured). • Number and type of visible explosive/munitions (e.g., blasting caps, dynamite, bomb, grenade, etc.). • Estimated size (e.g., length and diameter) of explosive/munitions. • Distinctive features (e.g., shape, color, markings) of explosive/munitions. • Nearby structures, ifany (so inhabitants canbe contacted and evacuated if necessary). • Public access (i.e., open or closed to motor vehicles) tothe vicinity. Notifications Local dispatch centers are responsible for notifying: • Agency law enforcement; • Unit safety officer; • Agency administrator; and • Local law enforcement. Discovery of Explosives, Munitions, Unexploded Ordnance Associated with Former Defense Sites The military retains liability and responsibility for munitions removal and for remedial actions onall lands transferred (or transferring) from the military tothe land management agencies andis responsible for explosives safety at former defense sites. The military must be notified for all UXOon these lands. Local law enforcement is responsible for contacting the appropriate military authority. Ifthe responsible military unit is unknown, then local law enforcement should contact theU.S. Army Forces Command (FORSCOM), 52nd Ordnance Group (EOD), atits 24-hour emergency response number, (931) 431-3824. For additional UXO safety information, see the IRPG. Industrial and Naturally Occurring Hazardous Materials Exposure Firefighters can potentially be exposed to hazards inthe wildland fire environment. Encountered hazards canbe both human and environmentally borne. This section provides information and mitigations for most encountered industrial and naturally occurring potential exposures. Recognizing there maybe unique/area specific hazardous exposures (e.g., fungus causing valley fever, erionite, coal seams), the following standards apply toall hazards: • Identifying unit-specific environmental hazards; • Develop JHAs/Ras for those hazards;
• Develop and provide specific training and SOPs; • Provide briefings/training for those who may be exposed; • If exposure is suspected, immediately disengage, and leave the area; and • Seek immediate medical attention if exposure symptoms occur. Hazardous Materials Response Hazardous materials response or control isnot a functional responsibility of wildland fire suppression resources. These incidents have tremendous potential to cause significant health and life safety issues. In order to protect the health and safety of agency personnel, no employee shall be directed or dispatched (including self-dispatching) toan incident involving hazardous materials unless they are provided with the required PPE and the appropriate certification level. Agency personnel on incidents involving hazardous material will limit their actions to those emergency services necessary for the immediate protection of themselves and the public and the prompt notification of appropriate public safety agencies. All wildland firefighters who are likely to witness or discover hazardous substances are required to complete their agency’s First Responder Awareness (Level I) program. Dump and Spill Sites Employees that discover any unauthorized waste dump or spill site that contains indicators of potential hazardous substances (e.g., containers of unknown substances, pools of unidentifiable liquids, piles of unknown solid materials, unusual odors, orany materials outof place ornot associated with an authorized activity) should take the following precautions: • Follow the procedures inthe IRPG; • Treat each site asif it contains harmful materials; • Donot handle, move, or open any container, breathe vapors, or make contact with the material; • Move a safe distance upwind from the site; • Contact appropriate personnel. Generally, this isthe hazardous materials coordinator for the local office; and • Firefighters need to immediately report hydrogen sulfide (H2 S) or potential exposure and seek immediate medical care. ○ BLM/NPS/FWS – Agencies require that all field personnel complete First Responder Awareness training. Firefighters are required to take an annual refresher for hazardous material protocol. The following general safety rules shall be observed when working with chemicals: • Read and understand the SDSs. • Keep the work area clean and orderly. • Use the necessary safety equipment. • Label every container with the identity ofits contents and appropriate hazard warnings. • Store incompatible chemicals in separate areas. • Substitute less toxic materials whenever possible. • Limit the volume of volatile or flammable material tothe minimum needed for short operation periods. • Provide means of containing the material if equipment or containers should break or spill their contents. Wildland Fires Within or Near Oil/Gas Operations For units with oil and gas operations within their jurisdiction, the following are the minimum standard operating procedures to help ensure the health and safety of wildland firefighters: • Firefighters shall receive annual oil and gas hazard recognition and mitigation training; • Local unit shall complete aJHA/RAfor wildland fire activities inoil and gas areas and provide a copy with a briefing toall local and incoming resources; • Establish response protocols and proper decontamination procedures to minimize exposure to additional employees, equipment, and facilities. Protocols will include notification procedures to respective oil and gas company(s); • Ensure oil and gas resource advisors are consulted; • Ensure that at least one member of each squad or engine crew is knowledgeable inthe use and data interpretation ofthe hydrogen sulfide gas monitor. Training onthe device will include ata minimum: ○ Equipment charging and maintenance of sensors; ○ Startup, zeroing, calibration, and bump testing procedures as recommended bythe manufacturer; and ○ How the monitor elicits a warning alarm (visual, auditory, vibration). • Understand peak reading, short-term exposure limits (STEL), and time weighted averages; ○ Understand howto set the monitors alarm threshold. • The monitor’s alarm shall beset atthe current American Conference on Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH) Threshold Limit Value (10PPM 2008) and STEL (15PPM 2008);
• If hydrogen sulfide gasis encountered, immediately disengage and leave area; and • Donot establish incident base camps or staging areas inor near oil and gas operations. The following websites provide additional information and training resources: • Wildland Fire Lessons Learned Center (https://lessons.wildfire.gov/search-irdb) • National Fire Protection Association • Oil and Gas Field Safety Guidelines for Incident Management Teams briefing template (“Additional Resources” at https://www.nifc.gov/programs/safety). Wildland Fires Within or Near Radioactive Locations Abandoned uranium mines and other potential radioactive sites exist in many areas of public lands. When these areas are identified, local management should provide information and direction on operations tobe used. General knowledge and understanding of potential radiation exposure is necessary for wildland fire program management to make valid risk management decisions in these areas. Wildland Fires Within or Near Coal Seams Coal is naturally occurring black or brownish rock usually located in rock strata in layers or veins, coal beds, or coal seams (smoldering exposed/underground coal deposit). Exposed coal seams are abundant through southeast and central Montana, western North Dakota, South Dakota, and Alaska. Risks Coal seam fires pose a serious problem that canbe a hazard to firefighter’s health and safety. Coal seam fires can emit highly toxic gases, including carbon monoxide (colorless, odorless, and tasteless), sulfur dioxide (colorless with an irritating, pungent odor), and other potentially hazardous gases. Some symptoms of exposure to these gases may include headaches, nausea, dizziness, fatigue, shortness of breath, coughing, and eye irritation. Because ofthe variances in symptoms and exposure levels, seek medical attention fora complete diagnosis if firefighters have been exposed to toxic gases from coal seam fires and symptoms persist. Firefighters exposed to coal ash, smoke, or vapor should trade in their PPE for fresh PPE. Individually bag PPE that has been contaminated. Required Actions/Precautions Firefighters are typically not equipped or trained for coal seam fires and should not attempt to extinguish such fires with hand tools and engines. Putting water on coal seam fires is normally useless. Mitigation crews will need to excavate the burning coal seam and mix the hot material with soil and water to cool. The area canbe reclaimed by backfilling the seam andre- vegetating the disturbed area. Signs ofa coal seam fire may include a rotten egg smell, smoking white ash, and continuous ornon-continuous lines of what appears tobe smoldering black rock (coal) where the flame mayor may not be visible. Avoid low-lying terrain in known coal seam fire areas especially early morning when air temperatures are cool. Gas tends to sink when airis cool and will accumulate inlow-lying areas. Donot depend on sense of smell to detect coal seam fires. At high concentrations, the sense of smell will be almost immediately overwhelmed or become numb. At lower levels, the sense of smell will slowly deteriorate as levels build inthe blood stream. Donot stand downwind of coal smoke under any conditions especially during suppression operations. Report the location ofall coal seam fires tothe ICor supervisor. ICs should notify agency representatives of locations of coal seam fires. Agencies should have resource advisors notify incoming incident command teams and firefighting resources of known locations of exposed coal seams, coal mines, or abandoned coal mines adjacent to ongoing incidents and the risks and precautions to take when working around coal seam fires. Hazardous Water Sources Many water sources used during wildland fire operations may appear harmless, but contain hazardous materials (e.g., hydraulic fracturing fluid, cyanide, sewage, corrosives). These hazardous water sources may pose threats to personnel health and firefighting equipment. Indicators that a water source maybe hazardous include proximity to active or inactive mining operations, gas/oil wells, water treatment facilities, or other industrial operations. In many cases, these hazardous water sources may not be fenced, andno warning signs maybe present. Fire personnel should evaluate water sources to ensure they donot contain potentially hazardous materials. If unsure ofthe contents ofa water source, personnel should not utilize the water source until its contents canbe verified.
Dispatch centers, resource advisors, oron-scene personnel can assist with verification of safe water sources. Information about known hazardous water sources should be included in operational briefings. Hydrogen Cyanide Exposure Synthetic materials (plastics, nylon, Styrofoam®, and polyurethane) routinely dumped onthe wildland can produce hydrogen cyanide (HCN) when burned. HCN exposure can disrupt the body’s ability touse oxygen and can cause asphyxia and/or carbon monoxide poisoning. Symptoms ofHCN poisoning include bitter almond odor on breath, burning taste in mouth, stiffness of lower jaw, feeling of numbness or constriction in throat, weakness, and headache. Follow hazardous materials protocols contained inthe IRPG to mitigate exposure toHCN. Immediately refer all personnel potentially exposed toHCN toa health care facility capable of toxicology testing and treatment. Safety for Personnel Visiting Fires A wide variety of personnel (agency administrators, other agency personnel, dignitaries, members ofthe news media, etc.) may visit incidents. The following standards apply toall visitors. Visits to Incident Base Camps orNon-Fireline Field Locations Recommended field attire includes: • Lace-up, closed toe shoes/boots with traction soles and ankle support • Trousers • Long-sleeved shirt • Field uniform (agency personnel) Fireline Logistical Support Personnel performing fireline logistical support duties (e.g., bus drivers, supply delivery/retrieval, incident drivers, non-tactical water delivery, etc.) must meet the following requirements: • Successfully complete fire shelter training. • Wear the required fireline PPE. • Receive an incident briefing. • Ensure adequate communications are established. • Provide proof ofa current WCT, asthe position requires. • Other requirements as established bythe IC. Minimum Requirements for Visits tothe Fireline/Prescribed Fire Burns Visits (e.g., media visits or political/administrative tours) to hazardous areas ofthe fire or areas that pose a fire behavior threat will be managed by meeting the requirements below: • Visits tothe fireline must have the approval ofthe IC/burn boss. • Visitors must maintain communications with the division supervisor or appropriate fireline supervisor ofthe area tobe visited. • Visitors must wear the required fireline PPE. • Required field attire includes undergarments made of100 percent orthe highest possible content of natural fibers or flame-resistant materials. • Required equipment/supplies include: ○ Hand tool ○ Water canteen Visitors tothe fireline/prescribed fire burns maybe “non-escorted” or “escorted” depending onthe following requirements: Non-escorted Visits Unescorted visitors tothe fireline must have: • An incident qualification with a minimum physical fitness level of “light” • Adequate communications and radio training • Completed the following training: ○ Introduction to Fire Behavior (S-190) ○ Firefighter Training (S-130) ○ Wildland Fire Safety Training Annual Refresher (RT-130), including fire shelter training Deviation from these requirements must be approved bythe ICor burn boss.
Escorted Visits All visitors lacking the requirements ofa non-escorted visit must be escorted while onthe fireline. • Visitors must receive training inthe proper useof fireline PPE. • Escorts will determine hand tool and water requirements. • Visitors must be able to walk in mountainous terrain andbe in good physical condition with no known limiting conditions. • Escorts must be minimally qualified as single resource boss. Deviation from these requirements must be approved bythe ICor burn boss. Helicopter Observation Flights Visitors who take helicopter flights to observe fires must receive approval from theIC, a passenger briefing, and meet the following requirements: • Required PPE: ○ Flight helmet ○ Leather boots ○ Flame-resistant clothing ○ Flight gloves (type GS/FRP-2) constructed ofa soft leather palm and stretchable Nomex® fabric for the back are preferred. These gloves have a long cuff extending several inches above the wrist providing total coverage when the flight suit sleeve is properly worn. Gloves should fit snugly to provide maximum finger dexterity for the wearer. All-leather gloves (without synthetic liners) are acceptable if they provide the wearer with wrist coverage and finger dexterity. Gloves that meet the flame-resistant Nomex® and leather design (conforms to Military Specification MIL-DTL-81188C) are available that are compatible with modern touchscreen devices. These are preferred when touchscreen devices are mission essential. Occasional passengers/visitors have no training requirement; however, a qualified flight manager must supervise loading and unloading of passengers. Fixed-Wing Observation Flights NoPPE is required for visitors and agency personnel who take fixed-wing flights to observe fires. However, a passenger briefing is required, and the flight level must not drop below 500 feet AGL. 6 Minutes for Safety Training Daily 6 Minutes for Safety training should be conducted to focus on high-risk, low-frequency activities that fire personnel may encounter during a fire season. A daily national 6 Minutes for Safety briefing or within the National Incident Management Situation Report. SAFENET SAFENET isa form, process, and method for reporting and resolving safety concerns encountered inany aspect (e.g., preparedness, training) of wildland fire, prescribed fire, orall-hazards incident management. The information provided onthe form provides important, safety-related data tothe National Interagency Fire Center (NIFC) for determining long-term trends and problem areas. The objectives ofthe form and process are: • To provide immediate reporting and correction of unsafe situations or close calls in wildland fire. • To provide a means of sharing safety information throughout the fire community. • To provide long-term data that will assist in identifying trends. Individuals who observe orwho are involved inan unsafe situation shall initiate corrective actions if possible, and then report the occurrence using SAFENET. Originators are encouraged, but not required, toput their name onthe report. Prompt replies tothe originator (if name provided), timely action to correct the problem, and discussion of filed SAFENETs at local-level meetings encourage program participation and active reporting. SAFENET submission does not replace accident reporting orany other valid agency reporting method; however, SAFENETs arean efficient wayto report a safety concern and involves front line firefighters inthe daily jobof being safe and keeping others safe by documenting and helping to resolve safety issues. SAFENETs maybe filed: • Electronically • Verbally by telephone at1-888-670-3938 • Bythe SAFENET Field Card (available at https://safenet.nifc.gov)
The SAFENET Field Card canbe used by wildland fire personnel to immediately identify and report unsafe situations or close calls that should receive immediate resolution/mitigation. Ifthe situation cannot be resolved atthe local/incident level, the reporting individual is encouraged to follow the formal SAFENET submission process stated above. Alert System The Alert System is intended as another mechanism to provide safety-related information tothe field. The expectation is that the messages will be forwarded throughout the wildland fire community ina relatively short period of time. There are three types of safety alert: • Safety Warning – A time-sensitive alert tothe wildland fire community addressing wildland fire safety hazards that pose an imminent threat, or have potential to pose a threat, to life or property. Red hash-marked bordered stationary will be associated with this type of alert. • Advisory – A time-sensitive alert from an NWCG committee tothe wildland fire community regarding procedural changes, equipment information and/oruse updates, potential safety hazards, etc. Yellow hash- marked bordered stationary will be associated with this type of alert. • Bulletin – A general alert from an NWCG committee tothe wildland fire community regarding the release of subject-specific information such as technical information, equipment updates, accident reports, etc. Depending onthe origin and/orthe subject content, a green hash-marked bordered stationary maybe associated with this type of alert. A database ofall alerts canbe found onthe NWCG website (https://www.nwcg.gov/alerts). Accident/Injury Reporting The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) mandates that all accidents and injuries be reported ina timely manner. Accident and injury reporting is important for the following reasons: • To protect and compensate employees foron-the-job incidents. • To assist supervisors and safety managers in taking corrective actions and establish safer work procedures. • To determine if administrative controls orPPE are needed to prevent a future incident ofthe same or similar type. • To provide a means for trend analysis. Agency Reporting Requirements Employees are required to immediately report every job-related accident to their supervisor. Managers and supervisors shall ensure that an appropriate level of investigation is conducted for each accident and record all personal injuries and property damage. Coordinate with your Human Resources office or administrative personnel to complete appropriate Office of Workers’ Compensation (OWCP) forms. Reporting isthe responsibility ofthe injured employee’s home unit regardless of where the accident or injury occurred. • BLM/NPS/FWS – Employees will report accidents using the Safety Management Information System (SMIS). Supervisors shall complete the SMIS report within six working days after the accident/injury. • FS – Employees will use the eSafety system through the Forest Service Dashboard (https://fsweb.wo.fs.fed.us/hrm/workers-compensation/index.php#esafety). • BIA – In addition to reporting accidents using SMIS, fire management officers will complete the Early Alert (https://www.bia.gov/bia/ots/dfwfm/bwfm/safety) and submit to regional fire management officers within 24 hours after the accident/injury. OSHA Reporting Requirements For accidents/injuries meeting the “serious accident criteria (found in chapter 18), OSHA must be notified within 8 hours. For other work-related accidents/injuries requiring in-patient hospitalizations, amputations, or loss ofan eye, OSHA must be notified within 24 hours. In-patient hospitalization is defined as formal admission tothe in-patient service ofa hospital or clinic for care or treatment (does not include admission for observation or diagnostic testing only). Supervisors will coordinate with the unit safety manager where the accident/injury occurred to ensure notifications are made tothe appropriate OSHA regional office (https://www.osha.gov/recordkeeping/2014). Critical Incident Management The NWCG Agency Administrator’s Guide to Critical Incident Management, PMS 926, is designed to assist agency administrators with the chronological steps in managing a critical incident through a series of checklists outlining functional area oversight and responsibilities.
The guide isnot intended to replace local emergency plans or other specific guidance that maybe available but should be used in conjunction with existing agency policy, line-of-duty-death (LODD)/loss-of-human-life (LOHL) handbooks, or other critical incident guidance. Local units should complete the guide or equivalent, and review and update at least annually. Critical Incident Stress Management Critical Incident Stress Management (CISM) isa comprehensive, integrated, systematic, and multicomponent crisis intervention program that was developed to manage traumatic experiences. CISM isa package of tactics that are designed to mitigate the impact ofa traumatic event, facilitate normal recovery processes, restore adaptive function, and identify people who would benefit from additional support services. CISM intervention services canbe applied to wildland fire, law enforcement, or other emergency responses. CISM interventions should never be used for grief counseling, mediation, ora replacement for mental health care professionals. The agency administrator is responsible for identifying an event asa critical incident. Critical Incident Peer Support Critical Incident Peer Support (CIPS) isan intervention tactic designed for colleagues or people of “mutual respect” to help each other through difficult situations. CIPS isthe foundation ofthe interagency wildland fire CISM program since peers understand the unique traumas, fears, job-related stresses, and offer instant trust, respect, credibility, and empathy. Camaraderie among peers has credibility that academic training cannot create. Critical Incident Peer Support Groups CIPS groups are assembled atthe time of request and can be ordered through the dispatch/coordination system (https://gacc.nifc.gov/cism/).
Chapter 8 Interagency Coordination and Cooperation Introduction Fire management planning, preparedness, prevention, suppression, restoration and rehabilitation, monitoring, research, and education will be conducted onan interagency basis with the involvement of cooperators and partners. The same capabilities used in wildland fire management will also be used, when appropriate and authorized, onnon- fire incidents inthe United States, andon both wildland fires and non-fire incidents internationally. National Wildland Fire Management Structure Wildland Fire Leadership Council The Wildland Fire Leadership Council (WFLC) isa cooperative, interagency body dedicated to achieving consistent implementation ofthe goals, actions, and policies inthe National Fire Plan and the Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy. WFLC provides a forum for high-level dialogues between Federal and non-Federal entities toset strategic direction for national fire management. The Council consists ofthe Department of Agriculture's Undersecretary for Natural Resources and Environment, the Deputy Undersecretary for Natural Resources and Environment, and the Chief ofthe U.S. Forest Service; the Department ofthe Interior's (DOI) Assistant Secretary for Policy, Management and Budget, the Directors ofthe National Park Service, Bureau of Indian Affairs, Bureau of Land Management, Fish and Wildlife Service, andU.S. Geological Survey; the Department of Homeland Security’sU.S. Fire Administration Administrator; the president ofthe intertribal timber council; two State governors selected from the National Governors Association; a county commissioner serving asa member ofthe National Association of Counties; a mayor serving asa member ofthe National League of Cities; a State forester serving atthe request ofa senior State-elected official; anda fire chief serving atthe request ofa senior local government-elected official. The Council is coordinated bythe Department of Agriculture's Deputy Undersecretary for Natural Resources and Environment and DOI’s Assistant Secretary for Policy, Management and Budget. Federal Fire Policy Council The Federal Fire Policy Council (FFPC) provides a common national Federal agency approach to wildland fire management. The FFPC ensures that wildland fire management policies, programs, activities, and budgets are coordinated and consistent among and between the member agencies and strives for coordinated and consistent policies and programs with non-Federal partner and cooperator agencies. The FFPC sets strategic policy and program direction, provides coordinated recommendations tothe Secretaries of Agriculture, the Interior, and Homeland Security and resolves inconsistencies among and between Federal wildland fire programs. The FFPC is accountable and has the authority to: • Set the vision and provide leadership for the Federal wildland fire program. • Set national Federal strategic wildland fire program goals and priorities. • Establish the Fire Executive Council (FEC). The FFPC is responsible to: • Provide coordinated Federal wildland fire management policy direction. • Resolve policy and program management inconsistencies. • Set strategic budget priorities for wildland fire management. • Coordinate and communicate with non-Federal entities. The FFPC is composed ofthe USDA Deputy Under Secretary for National Resources and Environment; the Chief ofthe Forest Service and the Deputy Chief of State and Private Forestry; and for DOI the Assistant Secretaries for Policy, Management and Budget, Fish and Wildlife and Parks, Indian Affairs, Land and Minerals Management, and Water and Science; the bureau directors ofthe Bureau of Land Management, the Fish and Wildlife Service, the National Park Service, the Bureau of Indian Affairs, and the US Geological Survey; the Deputy Assistant Secretary – Law Enforcement, Security and Emergency Management; the Assistant Administrator ofDHS-US Fire Administration; and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) representative. Fire Executive Council (FEC) The Fire Executive Council (FEC) provides a common, integrated, and coordinated Federal agency approach to wildland fire policy, leadership, budget, and program oversight. Within the broad strategic direction and vision setby the FFPC, the FEC ensures that the wildland fire management policies, programs, activities, and budgets are coordinated and consistent among and between the member agencies. FEC sets policy and program direction for
Federal wildland fire program implementation, provides coordinated recommendations tothe FFPC, and resolves inconsistencies among and between Federal wildland fire programs. FEC ensures policy and program coordination and integration with non-fire management programs and activities as well asnon-Federal partners and cooperators. The FEC is accountable and has the authority to: • Establish strategic Federal fire program budget direction and priorities. • Ensure coordinated Federal policy development. • Develop Federal business requirements and priorities. The FEC is responsible and has the authority to: • Provide coordinated Federal interagency executive level wildland fire policy leadership, direction, and program oversight. • Provide coordinated recommendations and advice tothe FFPC. • Provide wildland fire policy and program direction tothe Fire Management Board (FMB). • Provide strategic policy and program integration with resource management, aviation, and other related program areas. • Coordinate and communicate with other non-Federal entities. • Set strategic budget direction and recommendations. • Establish strategic direction and requirements for wildland fire information and technology, wildland fire administrative/business support, scientific and research support, and other program areas. • Approve wildland fire policy, as appropriate. • Resolve policy and program management inconsistencies and differences. • Oversee compliance with policy, budget, and program direction. • Charter the FMB. • Charter the National Wildfire Coordinating Group (NWCG) along with the Intertribal Timber Council, and the National Association of State Foresters. The FEC is composed ofthe Director and deputy directors, USFS Fire and Aviation Management (USDA); the Director, OWF; Director, Office of Aviation Services; fire executives from BLM, NPS, BIA, and FWS (DOI); and the US Fire Administration Chief, Emergency Support Branch, National Fire Programs (USDHS-FEMA). Fire Management Board The Fire Management Board (FMB) provides a mechanism for coordinated and integrated Federal wildland fire program management and implementation. The FMB, taking strategic policy and program direction from the FEC, directs, coordinates, and oversees the development and implementation of Federal wildland fire policy and programs to provide consistent and cost-effective program management. The FMB is accountable and has the authority to: • Coordinate Federal program management and oversight. The FMB is responsible for and has the authority to: • Provide common, integrated implementation strategies, approaches, programs, and oversight for implementing Federal wildland fire policies. • Provide Federal wildland fire program strategy, policy, budget, and program recommendations tothe FEC. • Provide recommendations on information and technology requirements, priorities, and investments tothe Wildland Fire Information and Technology Executive Board. • Provide recommendations on science and research requirements and priorities necessary to support wildland fire program management activities. • Identify requirements and recommend priorities for standards necessary to ensure interoperability of intergovernmental wildland fire activities and operations. • Consult with our non-Federal partners. • Develop recommendations for interagency wildland fire administrative/business support needs. The FMB is composed ofthe USFS Fire and Aviation Management Assistant Directors (USDA); the Deputy Director, Office of Wildland Fire (OWF); the Deputy Director, Office of Aviation Services; the fire directors for BIA, BLM, FWS, and NPS (DOI); and the Wildfire Program Manager, US Fire Administration (USDHS-FEMA). National Wildfire Coordinating Group The National Wildfire Coordinating Group (NWCG) is made upof the USFS, BIA, BLM, FWS, and NPS; Intertribal Timber Council; U.S. Fire Administration (USFA); State forestry agencies through the National Association of State Foresters (NASF); and the International Association of Fire Chiefs. The mission ofthe NWCG
isto provide leadership in establishing, maintaining, and communicating consistent interagency standards, guidelines, and qualifications for wildland fire management. Its goal isto provide more effective execution of each agency’s fire management program. The group provides a formalized system to agree upon standards of training, equipment, qualifications, and other operational functions. Interior Fire Executive Council The Interior Fire Executive Council (IFEC) provides interagency coordination and interagency executive-level wildland fire policy leadership, direction, and program oversight. IFEC isthe focal point for discussing wildland fire policy issues that affect the DOI and provides a forum for gathering the interests ofthe DOI bureaus to formulate aDOI recommendation and/or position. The IFEC is composed ofthe Director, Office of Wildland Fire (OWF) and the four DOI fire directors and their respective senior executives, as well asthe Director, Aviation Management Directorate, anda representative from United States Geological Survey (USGS). Office of Wildland Fire The Office of Wildland Fire (OWF) isa DOI organization responsible for managing and overseeing all wildland fire management activities executed bythe bureaus. OWF coordinates the DOI’s wildland fire programs and with other Federal and non-Federal partners, to establish legally and scientifically based department-wide policies and budgets, andto provide strategic leadership and oversight, that result in safe, comprehensive, cohesive, efficient, and effective wildland fire programs for the nation consistent with the bureaus' statutory authorities and constraints. Information about the OWF and the Federal wildland fire management organization canbe found at https://www.doi.gov/wildlandfire. Multi-Agency Management and Coordination National Multi-agency Coordinating Group National multi-agency coordination is overseen bythe National Multi-agency Coordinating Group (NMAC), which consists ofone representative each from the BLM, FWS, NPS, BIA, FS, NASF, and the USFA, who have been delegated authority by their respective agency directors to manage wildland fire operations ona national scale when fire management resource shortages are probable. The delegated authorities include: • Provide oversight of general business practices between NMAC and geographic area multi-agency coordination groups (GMAC). • Establish priorities among geographic areas. • Activate and maintain a ready reserve of national resources for assignment directly by NMAC as needed. • Implement decisions ofthe NMAC. The NMAC Operating Plan, NMAC correspondence, and other resources and references areat https://www.nifc.gov/nicc/administrative/nmac/index.html. Geographic Area Multi-Agency Coordinating Groups Geographic area multi-agency coordination is overseen by geographic area (state, region) lead administrators or fire managers from agencies that have jurisdictional or support responsibilities, or that maybe significantly impacted by resource commitments. GMAC responsibilities include: • Establish priorities for the geographic area. • Acquire, allocate, and reallocate resources. • Provide NMAC with National Ready Reserve (NRR) resources as required. • Issue coordinated and collective situation status reports. NWCG Standards for Interagency Incident Business Management All Federal agencies have adopted the NWCG Standards for Interagency Incident Business Management asthe official guide to provide execution of each agency’s incident business management program. Unit offices, geographic areas, or NWCG may issue supplements as long as policy or conceptual data isnot changed. Since consistent application of interagency policies and guidelines is essential, procedures inthe NWCG Standards for Interagency Incident Business Management will be followed. Agency manuals provide a bridge between manual sections and the NWCG Standards for Interagency Incident Business Management so that continuity of agency manual systems is maintained and all additions, changes, and supplements are filed ina uniform manner. • DOI – The Department ofthe Interior All Hazards-Supplement tothe NWCG Standards for Interagency Incident Business Management establishes business management guidelines for the DOI’sall ‐ hazards incidents. The DOI Supplement is under revision.
• BLM – The NWCG Standards for Interagency Incident Business Management replaces BLM Manual Section 1111. • NPS – Refer toRM-18. • FWS – Refer to Service Manual 621FW 1, Wildland Fire Management. • FS – Refer toFSH 5109.34. Standards for Cooperative Agreements Agreement Standards Agreements will be comprised oftwo components: the actual agreement andan operations plan. The agreement will outline the authority and general responsibilities of each party, and the operations plan will define the specific operating procedures. Any agreement which obligates Federal funds or commits anything of value must be signed bythe appropriate warranted contracting officer, certified agreement specialist, and/or delegated signatory official (USFS). Specifications for funding responsibilities should include billing procedures and schedules for payment. Any agreement that extends beyond a fiscal year must be made subject tothe availability of funds. Any transfer of Federal property must bein accordance with Federal property management regulations. All agreements must undergo periodic joint review; and, as appropriate, revision. Assistance in preparing agreements canbe obtained from local or state office fire and/or procurement staff. All appropriate agreements and operating plans will be provided tothe servicing dispatch center. The authority to enter into interagency agreements is extensive. • BLM – BLM Manual 9200, Departmental Manual 620DM, the Reciprocal Fire Protection Act, 42U.S.C. 1856, and the Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy and Program Review. • NPS – Chapter 2, Federal Assistance and Interagency Agreements Guideline (DO-20), and the Departmental Manual 620 (DM-620). NPS-RM-18, Interagency Agreements, Release Number 1, 02/22/99. • FWS – Service Manual, Departmental Manual 620DM, and Reciprocal Fire Protection Act, 42U.S.C. 1856. • FS – FSM 1580 and 5106.2, and FSH 1509.11. Types of Agreements Interagency Agreements Interagency Agreements are used when one Federal agency isin a position to provide materials, supplies, equipment, work, or service ofany kind that another Federal agency needs to accomplish its mission. Regional/State Cooperative Agreements Regional and State cooperative agreements shall be developed for mutual assistance. These agreements are essential tothe fire management program. Concerns for areawide scope should be addressed through these agreements. Local Cooperative Agreements Local units are responsible for developing agreements with local agencies and fire departments to meet mutual needs for suppression and/or prescribed fire services. Emergency Assistance Approved reimbursable agreements are the appropriate and recommended wayto provide emergency assistance. Ifno agreements are established, refer to your agency administrator (agency administrator) to determine the authorities delegated to your agency to provide emergency assistance. Contracts Contracts maybe used where they are the most cost-effective means of providing for protection commensurate with established standards. A contract, however, does not absolve an agency administrator ofthe responsibility for managing a fire program. Contracts should be developed and administered in accordance with Federal acquisition regulations. In particular, a contract should specify conditions for abandonment ofa fire in order to respond toa new call elsewhere. National Agreements for Wildland Fire Management USDOI and USDA National Agreement for Fire Management The objectives ofthe National Agreement for Fire Management Between the Bureau of Land Management (BLM), Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA), National Park Service (NPS), Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) ofthe United States Department ofthe Interior (DOI) and the Forest Service (FS) ofthe United States Department of Agriculture are:
• To provide a basis for cooperation among the agencies onall aspects of wildland fire management andas authorized innon-fire emergencies. • To facilitate the exchange of personnel, equipment (including aircraft), supplies, services, and funds among the agencies. DOI, USDA, and DOD Interagency Agreement The purpose ofthe Interagency Agreement for the Provision of Temporary Support During Wildland Firefighting Operations among the United States Department ofthe Interior, the United States Department of Agriculture, and the United States Department of Defense is: • To establish the general guidelines, terms, and conditions under which the National Interagency Fire Center (NIFC) will request, and Department of Defense (DOD) will provide, temporary support to NIFC in wildfire emergencies occurring within all50 States, the District of Columbia, and all U.S. territories and possessions, including fires on State and private lands. This agreement provides the basis for reimbursement ofDOD under the Economy Act. These and other agreements pertinent to interagency wildland fire management canbe found at https://www.nifc.gov/nicc/logistics/references.htm. Elements ofan Agreement The following elements should be addressed in each agreement: • The authorities appropriate for each party to enter inan agreement. Specifically, 42USC 1856 “incurred cost.” • The roles and responsibilities of each agency signing the agreement. • An element addressing the cooperative roles of each participant in prevention, presuppression, suppression, fuels, and prescribed fire management operations. • All mutually approved operations that require reimbursement will be identified and agreed toby an agreement which is required if participating parties have a cost-share. The mechanism and timing ofthe funding exchanges will be identified and agreed upon. • Appropriation limitations – Parties to this agreement are not obligated to make expenditures of funds or reimbursements of expenditures under terms of this agreement unless the Congress ofthe United States of America appropriates such funds for that purpose bythe Counties of _____, bythe Cities of _____, and/orthe Governing Board of Fire Commissioners of_____. • Liabilities/waivers – Each party waives all claims against every other party for compensation for any loss, damage, personal injury, or death occurring asa consequence ofthe performance of this agreement unless gross negligence onany part ofany party is determined. • Termination procedure – The agreement shall identify the duration ofthe agreement and cancellation procedures. • A signature page identifying the names ofthe responsible officials shall be included inthe agreement. ○ BLM – Refer to chapter 2, Agreements with Cooperators (Rangeland Fire Protection Association [RFPA] and Local Fire Department). ○ NPS – Refer toDO-20for detailed instructions and format for developing agreements. ○ FS – FSM 1580; FSH 1509.11, Chapter 30; FSH 1509.11 Chapter 90; FSH 6509.11g, Chapter 50. ○ BIA – Refer to Notification of Required Useof Cooperative Agreement Template in response to Office of Inspector General’s Independent Report onthe “Bureau of Indian Affairs Wildland Fire Suppression” (Memorandum dated September 06, 2013) and Clarification of Authorities on Implementation ofthe Wildland Fire Cooperative Agreement Template (Memorandum dated May28, 2014). Operating Plans Operating plans (OP) area subsidiary document toan agreement and shall be reviewed, updated, and approved prior tothe fire season. The plan maybe amended after a major incident as part ofa joint debriefing and review. The plan shall contain detailed, specific procedures which will provide for safe, efficient, and effective operations. General Elements ofan Operating Plan The following items should be addressed inthe OP: • Mutual Aid The OP should address that there maybe times when cooperators are involved in emergency operations and unable to provide mutual aid. In this case, other cooperators maybe contacted for assistance. • Command Structure The Incident Command System (ICS) will be used to manage all fires under Federal jurisdiction. Unified command should be used, as appropriate, whenever multiple jurisdictions are involved, unless oneor more parties request a single agency incident commander (IC). If there isa question about jurisdiction, fire managers
should mutually decide and agree onthe command structure as soon as they arrive onthe fire; agency administrators should confirm this decision as soon as possible. Once this decision has been made, the incident organization inuse should be relayed toall units onthe incident as well as dispatch centers. Inall cases, the identity ofthe IC must be made known toall fireline and support personnel. • Communications In mutual aid situations, a common designated radio frequency identified inthe OP should be used for incident communications. All incident resources should utilize and monitor this frequency for incident information, tactical use, and changes in weather conditions or other emergency situations. In some cases, because of equipment availability/capabilities, departments/agencies may have touse their own frequencies for tactical operations, allowing the “common” frequency tobe the link between departments. All department/agencies must change toa single frequency or establish a common communications link as soon as feasible. Clear text should be used. Avoid personal identifiers such as names. The “Communications” paragraph inthe OP shall meet Federal Communications Commission (FCC) requirements for documenting shared useof radio frequencies. • Distance/Boundaries Responding and requesting parties should identify any mileage limitations from mutual boundaries where “mutual aid” is reimbursable ornon-reimbursable. Also, for some fire departments, the mileage issue may not beone of initial attack “mutual aid” or “reimbursable assistance,” butof mutual assistance. In this situation, you may have the option to make it part of this agreement or identify itas a situation where the request would be made tothe agency having jurisdiction, which would then dispatch the fire department. ○ BLM – Agreements/OPs with DOD, best practices (including UXO protocols) are located onthe BLM Fire Operations website (https://doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/blm-fa/fire- operations/SitePages/Miscellaneous.aspx?web=1). • Time/Duration Responding and requesting parties should identify time limitations (usually 24 hours) for resources ina non- reimbursable status and reimbursable rates when the resources arein a reimbursable status. • Qualifications/Minimum Requirements NWCG Standards for Wildland Fire Position Qualifications, PMS 310-1, outlines the minimum requirements for training, experience, physical fitness level, and currency standards for wildland fire positions, which all participating agencies have agreed to meet for national mobilization. ○ During initial action, all agencies (Federal, State, local and Tribal) accept each other’s standards. Once jurisdiction is clearly established, then the standards ofthe agency(s) with jurisdiction prevail.  BLM/BIA – BLM/BIA may accept the standards ofany local cooperator through the duration ofan incident when the cooperator hasa current cooperative fire response agreement with BLM/BIA, and the cooperator isin compliance with the agreement. Personnel from agencies that donot subscribe tothe NWCG qualification standards maybe used on agency-managed fires and must only be assigned to duties commensurate with their competencies, qualifications, and equipment capabilities. ○ Prior tothe fire season, Federal agencies should meet with their State, local, and Tribal agency partners and communicate the qualification/ certification standards that will apply tothe useof local, non-Federal firefighters during initial action on fires on lands under the jurisdiction ofa Federal agency. ○ The Geographic Area Coordinating Group (GACG) should determine the application ofPMS 310-1 qualification/certification standards for mobilization within the geographic area. ○ Ona fire where anon-Federal agency is also an agency with legal jurisdiction, the standards of that agency apply. ○ TheOP should address qualification and certification standards applicable tothe involved parties. • Reimbursement Reimbursement will be based on actual expenditures. If suppression tactics cross jurisdictional boundaries, refer tothe cost share agreement (must bean agreement between participating parties) for reimbursement methods. Vehicles and equipment operated under the Federal excess property system will only be reimbursed for maintenance and operating costs. • Cooperation TheOP will be used to identify how the cooperators will share expertise, training, and information on items such as prevention, investigation, communication plans, safety, training, ICS, and the integration of resources. • Agency Reviews and Investigations OPs should describe processes for conducting agency specific reviews and investigations as well as describe processes for accident notifications tothe appropriate fire managers, line officers, and dispatch/coordination centers.
• Dispatch Centers Dispatch centers will ensure all resources know the name ofthe assigned ICand announce all changes in incident command. Geographic area mobilization guides, zone mobilization guides, and local mobilization guides should include this procedure as they are revised for each fire season. Fiscal Responsibility Elements ofan Operating Plan OPs should address the following: • The level of communication required with neighboring jurisdictions regarding the management ofall wildland fires. • The level of communication required with neighboring jurisdictions regarding suppression resource availability and allocation, especially for wildland fires with objectives that include benefit. • Identify howto involve all parties in developing the strategy and tactics tobe used in preventing wildland fire from crossing the jurisdictional boundary, and how all parties will be involved in developing mitigations which would be used ifa wildland fire does cross jurisdictional boundaries. • Jurisdictions, which may include State and private lands, should identify the conditions under which wildland fire maybe managed to achieve benefit, and the information or criteria that will be used to make that determination (e.g., critical habitat, hazardous fuels, and land management planning documents). • Jurisdictions will identify conditions under which cost efficiency may dictate where suppression strategies and tactical actions (e.g., itmay be more cost effective toput the containment line along an open grassland than along amid-slope in timber) are taken. Points to consider include loss and benefit to land, resource, social and political values, and existing legal statutes. • The cost-sharing methodologies that will be utilized should wildfire spread toa neighboring jurisdiction ina location where fire isnot wanted. • The cost-share methodologies that will be used should a jurisdiction accept or receive a wildland fire and manage itto create benefit. • Any distinctions in what cost-share methodology will be used ifthe reason the fire spreads to another jurisdiction is attributed toa strategic decision, versus environmental conditions (weather, fuels, and fire behavior), or tactical considerations (firefighter safety, resource availability) that preclude stopping the fire at jurisdictional boundaries. Examples of cost-sharing methodologies may include but are not limited tothe following: ○ When a wildland fire that is being managed for benefit spreads toa neighboring jurisdiction because of strategic decisions, andin a location where fire isnot wanted, the managing jurisdiction shall be responsible for wildfire suppression costs. ○ In those situations where weather, fuels, or fire behavior ofthe wildland fire precludes stopping at jurisdiction boundaries cost-share methodologies may include but are not limited to: a) Each jurisdiction pays for its own resources – fire suppression efforts are primarily on jurisdictional responsibility lands. b) Each jurisdiction pays for its own resources – services rendered approximate the percentage of jurisdictional responsibility, but not necessarily performed on those lands. c) Cost share by percentage of ownership. d) Cost is apportioned by geographic division. Examples of geographic divisions are divisions Aand B (using amap asan attachment); privately owned property with structures; or specific locations, such as campgrounds. e) Reconciliation of daily estimates (for larger, multi-day incidents) – this method relies upon daily, agreed-to, cost estimates, using incident action plans or other means to determine multi-agency contributions. Reimbursements canbe made upon actuals. The percentage for how to apply actuals canbe based on estimates, but actuals must be used when final settlement is completed. All-Hazards Coordination and Cooperation All-hazards is defined by NWCG asan incident, natural or manmade, that warrants action to protect life, property, environment, and public health or safety, andto minimize disruptions of government, social, or economic activities. Wildland fire isone type ofall-hazards incident. All-hazards incidents are managed using a standardized national incident management system and response framework. Stafford Act Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance The Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (Public Law93-288, as amended) establishes the programs and processes for the Federal Government to provide disaster and emergency assistance to States, local governments, Tribal nations, individuals, and qualified private non-profit organizations. The provisions ofthe
Stafford Act cover all hazards, including natural disasters and terrorist events. In response to, orin anticipation of, a major disaster or emergency as defined bythe act, the President “may direct any Federal agency, with or without reimbursement, to utilize its authorities and the resources granted toit under Federal law (including personnel, equipment, supplies, facilities, managerial, technical, and advisory services) in support of State and local assistance efforts.” • BIA – Refer to chapter 6for the Stafford Act Amendment Tribal Disaster Assistance. Homeland Security Act The Homeland Security Actof 2002 (Public Law 107-296) established the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) with the mandate and legal authority to protect the American people from the continuing threat of terrorism. Inthe act, Congress also assigned DHSas the primary focal point regarding natural and manmade crises and emergency planning. Homeland Security Presidential Directive-5 Homeland Security Presidential Directive (HSPD-5), Management of Domestic Incidents, February 28, 2003, is intended to enhance the ability ofthe United States to manage domestic incidents by establishing a single, comprehensive national incident management system. HSPD-5 designates the Secretary of Homeland Security asthe Principal Federal Official (PFO) for domestic incident management and empowers the Secretary to coordinate Federal resources used in response toor recovery from terrorist attacks, major disasters, or other emergencies in specific cases. National Response Framework Federal disaster relief and emergency assistance are coordinated bythe Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) using the National Response Framework (NRF). The NRF, using the National Incident Management System (NIMS), establishes a single, comprehensive framework for the management of domestic incidents. The NRF provides the structure and mechanisms for the coordination of Federal support to State, local, and Tribal incident managers; and for exercising direct Federal authorities and responsibilities. National Incident Management System HSPD-5 directed that the DHS Secretary develop and administer a National Incident Management System (NIMS) to provide a consistent, nationwide approach for Federal, State, and local governments to work effectively and efficiently together to prepare for, respond to, and recover from domestic incidents, regardless of cause, size, or complexity. To provide for interoperability and compatibility among Federal, State, and local capabilities, NIMS will include a core setof concepts, principles, terminology, and technologies covering ICS; multi-agency coordination systems; unified command; training; identification and management of resources (including systems for classifying types of resources); qualifications and certification; and the collection, tracking, and reporting of incident information and incident resources. Emergency Support Function Annexes Emergency Support Function (ESF) Annexes are the components ofthe NRF that detail the mission, policies, structures, and responsibilities of Federal agencies. They are utilized for coordinating resource and programmatic support tothe States, Tribes, and other Federal agencies or other jurisdictions and entities during incidents of national significance. Each ESF Annex identifies the ESF coordinator and the primary and support agencies pertinent tothe ESF. USDA-FSand USFA are the co-coordinators ofESF #4 – Firefighting. USDA-FS coordinates atthe national and regional levels with FEMA, State agencies, and cooperating agencies onall issues related to response activities. USFA coordinates with appropriate State agencies and local fire departments to expand structural firefighting resource capacity inthe existing national firefighting mobilization system and provides information on protection of emergency services sector critical infrastructure. The ESF primary agency serves asa Federal executive agent under the federal coordinating officer to accomplish the ESF mission. The ESF support agencies, when requested bythe designated ESF primary agency, are responsible for conducting operations using their own authorities, subject-matter experts, capabilities, or resources. USDA-FSis the primary agency for ESF #4 – Firefighting. • FS – Reference FSM 1594
Other NRF USDA-FSand DOI responsibilities are: ESF Support Annex USDA-FS Role DOI Role #01 Transportation Support Support #02 Communications Support Support #03 Public Works and Engineering Support Support #04 Firefighting Coordinator and Primary Support #05 Emergency Management Support Support #06 Mass Care, Emergency Assistance, Housing, and Human Services Support Support #07 Logistics Management and Resources Support Support Support #08 Public Health and Medical Services Support Support #09 Search and Rescue Support Primary #10Oil and Hazardous Materials Response Support Support #11 Agriculture and Natural Resources Primary Primary #12 Energy Support #13 Public Safety and Security Support Support #14 Cross-Sector Business and Infrastructure Support #15 External Affairs Support Support National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan The National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP, 40CFR 300) provides the organizational structure and procedures for preparing for and responding to discharges ofoil and releases of hazardous substances, pollutants, and contaminants. The NCP is required by section 105of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Actof 1980 (CERCLA), 42U.S.C. 9605, as amended bythe Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Actof 1986 (SARA), P.L. 99–499, andby section 311(d) ofthe Clean Water Act (CWA), 33U.S.C. 1321(d), as amended bythe Oil Pollution Actof 1990 (OPA), P.L. 101–380. The NCP identifies the national response organization that maybe activated in response actions to discharges ofoil and releases of hazardous substances, pollutants, and contaminants in accordance with the authorities of CERCLA and the CWA. The NCP specifies responsibilities among the Federal, State, and local governments and describes resources that are available for response and provides procedures for involving State governments inthe initiation, development, selection, and implementation of response actions, pursuant to CERCLA. The NCP works in conjunction with the NRF through Emergency Support Function 10 – Oil and Hazardous Material Response. Post-Katrina Emergency Management Reform Act The Post-Katrina Emergency Reform Actof 2006 (Public Law 109-295) amended the Homeland Security Act. This law established the FEMA Administrator as responsible for managing the Federal response to emergencies and disasters, and for reporting directly tothe President. The Secretary of Homeland Security isthe principal Federal official but has no direct authority for response or coordination. This law also amends the Stafford Actto allow FEMA, inthe absence ofa specific request or Presidential declaration, to direct other Federal agencies to provide resources and support where necessary to save lives, prevent human suffering, or mitigate severe damage. Presidential Policy Directive-8 Presidential Policy Directive-8 (PPD-8), National Preparedness, March 30, 2011, is intended to strengthen all-of- nation preparedness. PPD-8 directs the Secretary of Homeland Security to develop a national preparedness goal anda national preparedness system in coordination and consultation with other Federal departments and agencies, State, local, Tribal, and territorial governments, private and non-profit sectors, and the public. The national preparedness system is comprised of: • National planning frameworks for the prevention, protection, mitigation, response to, and recovery from national threats. These frameworks are similar and complementary tothe NRF. • Corresponding Federal interagency operational plans. • Guidance for the national interoperability of personnel and equipment. • Guidance for business, community, family, and individual preparedness.
All-Hazards Coordination and Cooperation Inan actual or potential incident of national significance that isnot encompassed bythe Stafford Act, the President may instruct a Federal department or agency, subject toany statutory limitations onthe department or agency, to utilize the authorities and resources granted toit by Congress. In accordance with Homeland Security Presidential Directive-5, Federal departments and agencies are expected to provide their full and prompt support, cooperation, available resources, consistent with their own responsibilities for protecting national security. Personnel assigned toall-hazards incidents may only perform duties within agency policy, training, and capability. NWCG Role in Support, Coordination, and All-Hazards Response by Wildland Fire Agencies NWCG has established guidelines to define NWCG’s role inthe preparedness for, coordination of, and support toall-hazards incidents. General All-Hazards Guidelines for NWCG • NIMS isthe foundation ofall response. NWCG principles, procedures, and publications will comply with and support NIMS. NWCG expects that all local, State, and Federal response agencies and organizations will comply with NIMS. • NWCG uses the NIMS definition of “all-hazards” (includes wildland fire): Describing an incident, natural or manmade, that warrants action to protect life, property, environment, and public health or safety, andto minimize disruptions of government, social, or economic activities. • NWCG recognizes FEMA’s role in overseeing the development, implementation, and maintenance of NIMS, which includes ICS and its components (forms, core competencies, training, qualifications, standards, etc.). • NWCG accepts the components of NIMS and will develop an endorsement process and additional qualifications requirements for positions having specific wildland fire application. • NWCG recognizes and supports the use of position-specific qualifications from other NIMS-compliant disciplines (law enforcement, structure fire, hazmat, etc.). • NWCG supports the ongoing development and maintenance of wildland fire systems tobe adaptable for all- hazards response. • NWCG expects that all wildland fire personnel engaged inall-hazards response, whether atthe national, regional, or local level, will base actions on both NWCG and agency policies, standards, doctrine, and procedures. • NWCG member agencies ensure all personnel responding toall-hazards incidents are properly trained, equipped, and qualified for their assigned position. • NWCG encourages all wildland fire agencies and personnel to receive appropriate preparedness training, focusing on general knowledge ofall-hazards response, disaster characteristics, and the effects from these events on citizens and responders. • NWCG encourages all wildland fire agencies and personnel to consider appropriate risk mitigation measures (e.g., vaccinations, personal protective equipment [PPE], etc.) prior to responding toall-hazards incidents. • NWCG coordinates with member agencies to ensure accountability of wildland fire personnel during all- hazards response. USFS All-Hazards Guiding Principles and Doctrine The Forest Service has developed doctrine, known asthe Foundational Doctrine for All-Hazard Response, outlining the guiding principles, roles, and responsibilities ofthe agency during all-hazards response. Forest Service responders and leadership are expected to follow this doctrine, established to help ensure the safest response conditions possible. The following principles encompass the guidelines, roles, and responsibilities established in this doctrine: • The intent of Forest Service all-hazards response and support isto protect human life, property, andat-risk lands and resources while imminent threats exist. • Personnel should be prepared and organized to support all-hazards responses by providing trained personnel to utilize their inherent skills, capabilities, and assets, without requiring significant advanced training and preparation. Support to cooperators requiring wildland resources will be consistent with employee core skills, capabilities, and training. • As incidents move from the response phase tothe recovery phase, there should bea shift to demobilizing agency resources. • Within all-hazards response environments, agency personnel may encounter situations in which there isan imminent threat to life and property outside of their agency’s jurisdiction. These environments include scenarios ranging from being first on scene ata vehicle accident to committing agency resources to protect a local community. Leaders are therefore expected touse their judgment and respond appropriately.
• Wildland resources deployed toall-hazards responses will understand the dynamic and complex environment and utilize their leadership, training, and skills to adapt, innovate, and bring order to chaos. • Leaders are expected to operate within the incident organizational structure encountered onall-hazards responses. When such structure is absent, leaders will utilize NIMS principles to assure safe and effective utilization of agency resources. • Leaders are expected to operate under existing policies and doctrine under normal conditions. Onall-hazards responses, fire and aviation business and safety standards may have tobe adapted tothe situation to successfully accomplish the mission. When conflicts occur, employees will use their judgment, weigh the risk versus gain, and operate within the intent of agency policy and doctrine. • All-hazards response will be focused on missions that we perform consistently and successfully. Workforce assignments will be directed toward the core skills developed through our existing training and curriculum. • Agency employees will be trained to operate safely and successfully inthe all-hazards environment. Preparedness training will focus on gaining general knowledge ofall-hazards response, disaster characteristics, as well asthe effects from these events on citizens and responders. • Specific operational skills will be facilitated through NIMS, working with the responsible agencies who supply the technical specialists who, in turn, provide the specific skill sets. The Forest Service will not train or equip to meet every hazard. • Wildland employees are expected to perform all-hazards support as directed within their qualifications and physical capabilities. All employees have the right toa safe assignment. The employee may suspend hisor her work whenever any environmental condition—or combination of condition—become so extreme than an immediate danger is posed to employee health and safety that cannot be readily mitigated bythe useof appropriate, approved protective equipment or technology. • Acceptable risk is risk mitigated toa level that provides for reasonable assurances that the all-hazards task canbe accomplished without serious injury to life or damage to property. • All-hazards, incident-specific briefing and training will be accomplished prior to task implementation. This preparation will usually occur prior to mobilization where incident description, mission requirements, and known hazards are addressed. Key protective equipment and associated needs for these all-hazards tasks that wildland employees donot routinely encounter or perform will be identified. This will be done—andbe in place—prior to task implementation. • Agency employees will be provided with appropriate vaccinations, credentials, and PPE to operate inthe all- hazards environment to which they are assigned. • Additional information canbe found inthe Forest Service Foundational Doctrine for All-Hazard Response at https://www.fs.usda.gov/managing-land/fire/ibp/all-hazard. Incident Management Teams – All-Hazards and Other Non-Wildland Different entities have developed incident management teams (IMT) based onICS core competencies under NIMS. Federal agencies with IMTs include theU.S. Coast Guard, the EPA, USDA’s Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS), DOI’sNPA and FWS, and others. In addition, many States and metropolitan areas have developed all-hazards IMTs (AHIMT). AHIMT consists of personnel from various disciplines (fire, rescue, emergency medical, hazardous materials, law enforcement, public works, public health, and others) trained to perform the functions ofthe command and general staff atthe type 3 level. AHIMTs are often sponsored or administered bya State or local emergency management agency and may be type 2or type 3 level (based onthe FEMA National Qualification System or other recognized qualification system). All-hazards IMTs have been used to support wildland fire operations in different ways, including: 1) managing a fire incident with the support ofkey wildland fire positions supporting command and general staff; 2) independently supporting activities under direction ofa wildland fire IMT (e.g., coordinating evacuation/re-entry ofa jurisdictional area); and3) supporting a Geographic Area Coordination Center (GACC) or other entity (e.g., managing a mobilization center). Many different entities that sponsor an AHIMT or other non-wildland fire IMT have requested that their personnel be allowed to “shadow” (sometimes referred toas “field training” or “field mentoring”) wildland fire IMT positions during incidents. The primary purpose of shadowing isto gain insight to complex incident management. All shadowing events should be coordinated with the receiving GACCs and the ICat an incident. • DOI – refer to https://www.doi.gov/emergency/plans-and-policies.
International Wildland Fire Coordination and Cooperation U.S. – Mexico Cross Border Cooperation on Wildland Fires In April 2015, the DOI and USDA signed a wildfire protection agreement with Mexico. The agreement has two purposes: • To enable wildfire protection resources originating inthe territory ofone country to cross the United States- Mexico border in order to suppress wildfires onthe other side ofthe border within the zone of mutual assistance (10 miles/16 kilometers) in appropriate circumstances. • To give authority for Mexican andU.S. fire management organizations to cooperate on other fire management activities outside the zone of mutual assistance. National operational guidelines for this agreement are located at https://www.nifc.gov/nicc/logistics/references.htm. These guidelines cover issues atthe national level and also provide a template for those issues that need tobe addressed in local operating plans. The local operating plans identify how the agreement will be implemented bythe GACCs (and zone coordination centers) that have dispatching responsibility onthe border. The local operating plans will provide the standard operational procedures for wildfire suppression resources that could potentially cross theU.S. border into Mexico. U.S. – Canada, Reciprocal Forest Firefighting Arrangement Information about United States – Canada cross border support is located at https://www.nifc.gov/nicc/logistics/references.htm. This policy guidance was determined byan exchange of diplomatic notes between theU.S. and Canada in 1982 and provides operational guidelines for the Canada – U.S. Reciprocal Forest Fire Fighting Arrangement. These guidelines are updated yearly. U.S. – Australia/New Zealand Wildland Fire Arrangement Information about United States – Australia and United States – New Zealand support is located at https://www.nifc.gov/nicc/logistics/references.htm. This link provides a copy ofthe arrangements signed between theU.S. and the states of Australia, and between theU.S. and the country ofNew Zealand for support during severe fire seasons. It also contains the annual operating plans (AOPs) that provides more detail onthe procedures, responsibilities, and requirements used during activation. International Non-wildland Fire Coordination and Cooperation International Disasters Support Federal wildland fire employees maybe requested through theFS to support theU.S. Government’s (USG) response to international disasters by serving on Disaster Assistance Response Teams (DARTs). A DART isthe operational equivalent ofan ICS team used bythe U.S. Agency for International Development’s Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance (OFDA) to provide anon-the-ground operational capability atthe site ofan international disaster. Prior to being requested fora DART assignment, employees will have completed a weeklong DART training course covering information about: • USG agencies charged with the responsibility to coordinate USG responses to international disaster. • The purpose, organizational structure, and operational procedures ofa DART. • How the DART relates to other international organizations and countries during an assignment. Requests for these assignments are coordinated through theFS International Programs, Disaster Assistance Support Program (DASP). • DART assignments should notbe confused with technical exchange activities, which donot require DART training. More information about DARTs canbe obtained atthe FS International Program’s website, https://www.fs.usda.gov/about-agency/international-programs.
Chapter 9 Fire Management Planning Purpose The purpose of fire management planning isto provide for firefighter and public safety, and outline fire management strategies and tactics that, when implemented, protect values, and meet resource goals and objectives ofthe land and resource management plan (L/RMP). Planning strategically allows for responses to fire commensurate with risk and movement towards desired conditions. Fire planning products include a concise summary of information organized by fire management unit (FMU) orby other geospatially explicit representations ofthe landscape. These products should be updated asnew information becomes available, as conditions onthe ground necessitate updates, or when changes are made tothe L/RMP. Products may address response to wildfire, hazardous fuels and vegetation management, burned area emergency stabilization and rehabilitation, prevention, community interactions and collaborative partnerships roles, and monitoring and evaluation of programs. Fire management planning efforts should address the vision and goals ofthe National Cohesive Wildland Fire Management Strategy (2014, Addendum Update 2023) (Cohesive Strategy). The Cohesive Strategy vision is “To safely and effectively extinguish fire, when needed; use fire where allowable; manage our natural resources; and collectively, learn to live with wildland fire.” The Cohesive Strategy goals are: • Resilient Landscapes • Fire-adapted communities • Safe, Effective, Risk-based Wildfire Response Federal Interagency Policy “Fire, asa critical natural process, will be integrated into land and resource management plans (L/RMP) and activities ona landscape scale and across agency boundaries” (Review and Update ofthe 1995 Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy, January 2001). Fire management plans should be developed collaboratively between Federal agencies and Tribal, local, and State agencies to accomplish resource and protection objectives. Every area with burnable vegetation must have an approved fire management plan (FMP). FMPs are strategic plans that define a program to manage wildland fires based onthe area's approved land management plan. When practical, fire management plans should contain mutually developed objectives for managing fires that cross jurisdictional boundaries. FMPs must provide for firefighter and public safety; include fire management strategies, tactics, and alternatives; address values tobe protected and values at risk; address the location and conditions under which resource and protection objectives canbe met; consider public health issues; andbe consistent with resource management objectives, activities ofthe area, and environmental laws and regulations. FMPs should be based upon the best available science. Agency Planning Guidance Department ofthe Interior FMPs must be consistent with the Department ofthe Interior (DOI) Interagency Fire Management Plan Framework and subsequent bureau direction. FMP content maybe represented in spatial, text-based and/or digital formats. • The DOI framework is available at https://www.nwcg.gov/committees/interagency-fire-planning-committee. ○ BLM – FMP Template is available at https://doimspp.sharepoint.com/:w:/r/sites/blm-fa/business- practices/_layouts/15/Doc.aspx?sourcedoc=%7B371C2FC6-46E9-4C2F-9DB5- DAB76CF52B12%7D&file=FA-PIM-2024-001_a1.docx&action=default&mobileredirect=true. ○ NPS – FMP Template and information is available at https://www.nwcg.gov/committees/interagency-fire- planning-committee. ○ FWS – FMP Template and information is available at https://doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/fws- FF09R00000/SitePages/Fire-Planning.aspx. U.S. Forest Service Forest Service (FS) FMPs area combination of enhanced spatial planning contained inthe Wildland Fire Decision Support System (WFDSS) and the Fire Management Reference System (FMRS)—a collection of plans required for
fire program management, such as aviation, operations, dispatch, and fire danger operating plan products. Fire management planning will bea continuing effort to ensure that guidance represented spatially in WFDSS and the FMRS are consistent with L/RMP direction, reflecting available fire response options to move from current to desired conditions. A Fire Management Planning Guide (https://fsweb.wo.fs.fed.us/fire/fmp/) describes spatial fire planning and the FMRS. As allowed inL/RMPs, fire response strategies should be consistent with the cohesive strategy and developed in collaboration with adjoining land managers. Other Resources For information on utilizing the spatial fire planning method in WFDSS, see the WFDSS Spatial Fire Planning Guide located onthe WFDSS training page. Concepts and Definitions For further clarification of concepts and definitions that follow, refer to Terminology Updates Resulting from Release ofthe Guidance for Implementation of Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy (2009); FMB Memorandum 19-004, Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy Terminology and the Guidance for Implementation of Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy, February 13, 2009. Land and Resource Management Plan TheL/RMPis a document prepared with public participation and approved bythe agency administrator that provides guidance and direction for land and resource management activities foran administrative area. TheL/RMP may identify fire's role ina particular area and for a specific benefit ormay contain general statements regarding the role of fire across the land management unit. Guidance contained inthe L/RMP provides the basis for the development of strategic fire management objectives and the fire management program inthe designated area. Fire Management Plan A fire management plan (FMP) identifies and integrates all wildland fire management and related activities within the context of approved land/resource management plans. The FMP defines a program to manage wildland fires (wildfire and prescribed fire). The plan is supplemented by operational plans, including but not limited to preparedness plans, preplanned dispatch plans, prescribed fire burn plans, and prevention plans. FMPs assure that wildland fire management goals and components are coordinated. • Spatial Fire Management Plan – A spatial fire management plan (SFMP) isa strategic plan that contains text based and spatially represented information that guides a full range of fire management activities andis supported byaL/RMP. • Spatial Fire Management Plan Mapsheet – A spatial FMP mapsheet isa collection ofone or more tables, graphics, maps, or other information ona single page or poster. • Spatial Fire Management Plan Map Set – A spatial FMP map setis a compilation ofall the mapsheets that make upa SFMP. Compliance Compliance generally includes the full range of considerations and procedures defined by each agency to comply with laws, such asthe National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), Section 106of the Archeological Resources Protection Act, Section 7of the Endangered Species Act, Clean Air Act, Wilderness Act, Executive Orders. Connection to Other Plans FMPs (DOI) and/or spatial fire planning in WFDSS (FS) capture fire related direction and decisions from L/RMPs. If fire management direction and decisions were not adequately integrated into the existing L/RMP, additional NEPA maybe necessary. Air Quality and Smoke Management Clean airis a primary natural resource value inall Federal units. Fire management activities which result inthe discharge ofair pollutants (e.g., particulates, carbon monoxide, and other pollutants from fires) are subject to, and must comply with, all applicable Federal, State, interstate, and local air pollution control requirements, as specified by Section 118of the Clean Air Act, as amended (42USC 7418). These requirements are the same substantive, procedural, and administrative requirements that apply toa private person or other non-governmental entity. The protection of these resources must be given full consideration in fire management planning and operations. Coordination with a State or State air regulatory office is required during the development of LMRPs and FMPs in order to determine procedures for compliance with State air quality regulations. Each agency should consult with their fire management unit the proper procedures for obtaining coordination with the State or States in which the unit is located, or when notified bythe State that anair pollution violation has occurred.
The National Wildfire Coordinating Group (NWCG) Smoke Management Guide for Prescribed Fire, PMS 420-3, 2020 Edition, isthe primary technical reference and should be referenced when developing and implementing wildland fire management plans. The 2019 Dingell Act requires type 1 fires to assign air resource advisors (ARA, technical specialist) tothe maximum extent practicable and consideration of assigning ARAs for type 2 fires (43USC 17486b-1(f)). This will provide smoke projections and provide capability for coordination with State, Tribal and local air regulatory and public health agencies. Air Quality Definitions National Ambient Air Quality Standards The National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) are uniform air quality goals established bythe Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The EPA designated two types of national air quality standards, primary which provides public health protection and secondary which provides public welfare protection. Criteria Pollutants The EPA has designated and established primary and secondary NAAQS for six common air pollutants: sulfur dioxide (SO2), nitrogen oxides (NOX), carbon monoxide (CO), particulate matter (PM10 and PM2.5), ground-level ozone (O3), and lead (Pb). State Implementation Plan Section 110of the Clean Air Act requires each State to adopt and submit tothe EPAa state implementation plan (SIP) that provides for the implementation, maintenance, and enforcement of NAAQS in each Air Quality Control Region. Federal Implementation Plan A federal implementation plan (FIP) is used bythe EPAto ensure air quality is maintained and enforced in accordance with established NAAQS. This plan is used when a State’sSIP is found unacceptable. Attainment Area An attainment area isa geographic area that meets the primary NAAQS established bythe EPA. Note: An area may meet the established NAAQS for one criteria pollutant but have unacceptable levels for another. An area could bein attainment for one criteria pollutant and simultaneously in nonattainment for another. Nonattainment Area A nonattainment area isa geographic area that does not meet the primary NAAQS limits established bythe EPAto protect public health and the environment. Note: The EPA establishes time limits for nonattainment areas to achieve specified air quality goals and may further designate nonattainment areas as extreme, severe, serious, moderate, or marginal. Maintenance Area A maintenance area isa geographic area previously designated nonattainment and subsequently redesignated to attainment, fora probationary period, dueto achieving the NAAQS.
Chapter 10 Preparedness Preparedness Overview Fire preparedness isthe state of being ready to respond to wildfires based on identified objectives andis the result of activities that are planned and implemented prior to fire ignitions. Preparedness requires: • Identifying necessary firefighting capabilities; • Implementing coordinated programs to develop those capabilities; • A continuous process of developing and maintaining firefighting infrastructure; • Predicting fire activity; • Implementing prevention activities; • Identifying values tobe protected; • Hiring, training, equipping, prepositioning, and deploying firefighters and equipment; • Reviewing preparedness plan compliance; • Correcting deficiencies; and • Improving planning and operations. Preparedness activities should focus on developing interagency response capabilities that will result in safe, effective, and efficient fire operations aligned with risk-based fire management decisions. Preparedness activities will be consistent with direction inthe approved land and resource management plans (L/RMP) and fire management plans. Preparedness Planning Atthe local level, preparedness planning and the resultant activities begin with a Fire Danger Operating Plan (FDOP), which includes a number of other plans that result in coordinated actions based onthe fire situation. • BLM – Districts can use an FDOP, Fire Danger Analysis Document (FDAD), or Fire Weather and Fire Occurrence Analysis Document (FWOAD), depending on which format best meets their needs. • NPS – Parks or Zones can use an FDOP orNPS FWOAD to document the analysis process and development of decision points which support Fire Management Plan appendices development. The NPS FWOAD template and supporting documents canbe found onthe NPS FAM SharePoint site. References, templates, and other supporting materials pertaining tothe FDOP process and related operationally focused preparedness plans canbe found at https://www.nwcg.gov/committees/fire-danger-subcommittee (see sections for Useful Resources and NFDRS2016 Rollout Information) and https://www.wfas.net. • BLM – References, templates, and other supporting materials pertaining tothe FDAD/FWOAD process canbe found inFA-IM-2019-004, change 1. Required biennial checklists for fire danger documentation canbe found at https://doimspp.sharepoint.com/:w:/r/sites/blm-fa/fire-planning-fuels-management/Fire Planning and Fuels Management Program Files/Fire Planning/RedBook/BLM Review Checklists for Fire Danger Documentation.docx?d=w69d8133d4c384c218711447001fc7d32&csf=1&web=1&e=gAUk2f. Outputs from an FDOP process are used to support decisions found in many components of preparedness plans. These actions will ensure a unit is appropriately prepared to react tonew and emerging wildfire incidents. Preparedness plans should include but are not limited to: • Fire Danger Operating Plan (as specified by agency requirements) • Preparedness Level Plan • Initial Response/Preplanned Dispatch Plan • Step-up/Staffing Plan • Fire Prevention/Mitigation Plan (as specified by agency requirements) • Closure/Restriction Plan (as specified by agency requirements) • Geographic Area Mobilization Guide (updated annually) • Geographic Area Draw-Down Guidance (updated annually) Fire Danger Rating The National Fire Danger Rating System (NFDRS) and the Weather Information Management System (WIMS) are the principal applications used bythe Federal land management agencies to assess fire danger. At every scale, fire danger rating isa key consideration for staffing and prepositioning preparedness resources, regulating industrial
activity, or placing restrictions on public lands. Because these assessments are used byand affect a wide variety of stakeholders, including Federal and State agencies, local governments, industrial, and other private entities, as well asthe general public, participation ina recognized fire danger system and careful management of weather and fire data is vital to ensure accurate assessments and the consistent application of fire danger rating, especially for broader scale assessments. The following requirements apply toall NFDRS-compliant weather stations managed in WIMS: • For the primary fuel model (i.e., the first model listed inthe WIMS station catalog): ○ Identify an appropriate staffing index; ○ Identify the staffing index breakpoints (i.e., the two highest breakpoint values and their associated percentiles*); and ○ Identify the number of decision classes (i.e., the number of staffing levels).  * For units that have not performed detailed analysis to identify fire business thresholds or climatological breakpoints, itis recommended touse the 90th and 97th percentiles as default values for these critical percentiles.  BLM – 80th and 95th percentiles • To support Predictive Services products, include “16Y” asan “active” fuel model inthe WIMS station catalog for every station. Communication of Fire Danger Daily observed and forecasted fire danger outputs will be: • Communicated daily to local fire personnel toaid in situational awareness; and • Should include the staffing index and/or index/component used. Fire danger will be conveyed tothe public using the five Adjective Fire Danger Rating classes: low, moderate, high, very high, and extreme. Fire Danger Operating Plan • BLM – Districts can use an FDOP, FDAD, or FWOAD depending on which format best meets their needs. • NPS – Parks or Zones can use an FDOP or FWOAD depending on which format best meets their needs. Ideally developed for interagency field-level operations (e.g., corresponding tothe area within the jurisdiction ofa third-tier dispatch center), an FDOP isan integral component of local fire management planning. An FDOP documents the analysis process and the development of decision points tobe used for future weather and fire occurrence situations based onan analysis of local conditions, historical weather, and historical fire occurrence. The analysis and decision points are developed using decision support tools such asthe NFDRS, the Canadian Forest Fire Danger Rating System (CFFDRS), the Palmer Drought Index, live fuel moisture data, monthly or seasonal wildland fire outlooks, seasonal climate forecasts, and wildland fire risk analyses. The analysis of historical weather and fire occurrence is conducted utilizing a statistical software program, such asbut not exclusive to FireFamily Plus (FFP), which calculates fire danger indices and can correlate them to historical fire occurrence. An FDOP process blends science, historical data, established processes, and local knowledge to provide a unified framework for local interagency unit managers/administrators to make informed decisions that result in safe, efficient, and effective responses to fire situations. Every field-level unit with a fire program should be covered byan FDOP and should participate inthe planning process. FDOP developers should attend Intermediate NFDRS (S-491) and preferably, Advanced NFDRS (S-591) courses. Units are encouraged to seek the participation ofand review by NFDRS or CFFDRS subject matter experts when developing an FDOP. Established FDOPs should be monitored, reviewed annually, and updated as necessary to ensure they continue to meet the preparedness needs ofthe local units. • BLM – BLM offices are required to have an FDOP, FDAD, oran FWOAD. BLM offices are required to complete and document their review every other year and updated every five years. • NPS – Parks or Zone programs are required to have an FDOP, oran FWOAD and must complete and document a review of weather and fire occurrence data every other year and update every five years. In conjunction with the analysis noted above, an FDOP also describes: • Processes, such as daily input and output monitoring of WIMS; • Tools that will be utilized to communicate fire danger information, such as Fire Danger PocketCards (PocketCards), or seasonal trends analysis; and • Related products, such as staffing, dispatch, and preparedness level plans (which canbe included as components ofan FDOP or linked, if presented as separate plans).
An FDOP template canbe found at https://www.nwcg.gov/committees/fire-danger-subcommittee/nfdrs/rollout- workshop/library. • BLM – Reference templates and other supporting materials pertaining tothe FDAD/FWOAD process canbe found inFA-IM-2019-004, change 1. Required minimum content foran FDOP includes the following components: • Roles and Responsibilities This section ofan FDOP defines the roles and responsibilities for those responsible for the development, maintenance, and daily implementation ofthe plan, program management related tothe plan, and associated training. • Fire Danger Area Inventory This section ofan FDOP presents the inventory ofthe basic components ofan FDOP area, which will describe the general area, including the administrative units involved inthe planning process. The fire danger area inventory will include: ○ Fire history, as well as identification of fire/ignition issues specific tothe area; ○ Description of vegetation/fuels, topography, and weather/climatology, resulting inthe delineation of specific FDRAs, which are broad landscapes (typically, onthe scale of tens or hundreds of thousands of acres each) that are considered to have relatively homogeneous fire danger; ○ The existing weather station network and identification ofany additional weather station system needs; and ○ Validation that each remote automatic weather station (RAWS) meets the requirements ofthe National Wildfire Coordinating Group (NWCG) Standards for Fire Weather Stations, PMS 426-3. • Operational Procedures This section ofan FDOP establishes the procedures used to gather and process data in order to integrate fire danger rating information into decision processes. The network of fire weather stations whose observations are used to determine fire danger ratings is identified. Station maintenance responsibilities and schedules are defined. Include the following information: ○ Daily weather processing schedule and procedures; ○ Daily communication schedule and modes; ○ Seasonal station catalog adjustment schedule and responsible personnel; ○ Annual review of decision points and responsible personnel; and ○ Periodic review of PocketCards or other communication methodology and responsible personnel. • Decision Point Analysis This section ofan FDOP describes the analysis of climatological breakpoints and fire business thresholds that trigger changes in fire-danger-related decisions within an FDRA. Decision points are identified using statistical analysis software such asbut not limited toFFP. Distinct selections of fuel model and fire danger index/component (NFDRS or CFFDRS) are appropriate for different management decisions (such as staffing, initial response, or industrial and public restrictions). Because fire business thresholds correlate periods of historical fire danger and fire occurrence, they generally provide the best decision support and are appropriate for identifying staffing levels, dispatch levels, fire restrictions, preparedness levels, fire prevention activities, and other specific readiness actions. Climatological breakpoints, which are expressed as percentiles, maybe appropriate as decision points for long-term decisions and general preparedness activities such as seasonal staffing start/end dates or contract aircraft availability periods. Note: WIMS relies exclusively on climatological breakpoints to compute staffing level and adjective rating. If fire business thresholds are used as decision points, staffing level and adjective rating must be computed outside of WIMS. • Fire-danger-based Decisions This section ofan FDOP describes the decision points used in step-up/staffing plans, initial response/preplanned dispatch plans, preparedness level plans, prevention plans (which include how Adjective Fire Danger Ratings are determined and will be applied), closure/restriction plans, etc. This section should include the rationale for the fuel model and index/component selection and the corresponding decision points for each of those plans. The plans maybe included inan FDOP orbe stand-alone plans. Preparedness Level Plans Preparedness level plans are required atthe national, state/regional, and local levels. These plans address the five preparedness levels (1-5) and provide management direction based on identified levels of burning conditions (fire danger), fire activity, resource commitment/availability, such as incident management teams (IMT) assigned, and other considerations (in contrast to staffing levels, which typically only consider fire danger, as described below). Preparedness level plans maybe developed bya state/regional office for agency-specific use.
Supplemental preparedness actions to consider include but are not limited tothe following items: • Management briefings, direction, and considerations; • Support function – consideration given to expanded dispatch activation and other support needs (procurement, supply, ground support, and communication); • Support staff availability outside of fire organization; • Fire danger/behavior assessment; • Fire information – internal and external; • Multi-agency coordination group/area command activation; and • Prescribed fire direction and considerations. Refer tothe National Interagency Standards for Resource Mobilization and Geographic Area Coordination Center (GACC) mobilization guides for more information on preparedness level plans. Step-up/Staffing Plans Step-up/staffing plans are designed to direct incremental preparedness actions atthe local level in response to changing fire danger. Each plan should address the unit’s chosen number of staffing levels, and the corresponding actions to consider for those changing fire danger conditions, as reviewed annually. The step-up/staffing plan should be based on analysis completed as part ofthe unit’s FDOP and the analysis rationale, ifnot the entire plan, should be included as part ofan FDOP. Staffing Level The staffing level should be used to guide daily internal fire operational decisions atthe local level. The staffing level specifies appropriate daily staffing for initial response resources, such as when to implement seven-day coverage and adjusted work schedules, and the number of personnel committed to initial attack resources (in contrast tothe Initial Response/Preplanned Dispatch Plan – described below – that specifies the number of resources dispatched toan incident). Staffing level helps define daily readiness. A unit can operate with three to nine levels of staffing. Most units typically use five (1, 2, 3, 4, 5) orsix (1, 2, 3L, 3H, 4, 5) levels. The use of fire business thresholds to determine staffing levels is encouraged; however, they must be computed outside ofthe WIMS. The step-up/staffing plan describes preidentified escalating responses at fire business or climatological thresholds analyzed inan FDOP and FMP. A step-up/staffing plan should also include recurring supplemental preparedness actions designed to enhance the unit’s fire management capability during short periods (Fourth of July, or other preidentified events) where staffing normally needs tobe increased to meet initial attack, prevention, or detection needs. The staffing plan should also consider supplemental staffing actions such asthe following items: • Fire prevention actions, including closures/restrictions, media messages, signing, and patrolling; • Prepositioning or augmentation of suppression resources; • Cooperator discussion and/or involvement; • Safety considerations: safety messages, safety officer; • Increased initial attack dispatch staffing; and • Increased detection activities. In contrast to staffing actions established for the normal range of conditions, severity isa longer duration condition that cannot be adequately dealt with under normal staffing, such asa killing frost converting live fuel to dead fuel or drought conditions. Severity is discussed later in this chapter. Initial Response/Preplanned Dispatch Plans Local-level, initial response/preplanned dispatch plans, also referred toas run cards, specify the fire management response (e.g., number and type of suppression assets to dispatch) within a defined geographic area toan unplanned ignition, based on fire weather, fuel conditions, fire management objectives, and resource availability. Fire management officers (FMOs) will ensure that initial response/preplanned dispatch plans arein place, utilized, and provide for initial response commensurate with guidance provided inthe FMP and/orL/RMP. Initial response/preplanned dispatch plans will reflect agreements and operating plans and will be reviewed annually prior to fire season. These plans maybe modified as needed during fire season to reflect the availability of national, prepositioned, and/or severity resources. Fire Prevention/Mitigation Plans Unit-level fire prevention/mitigation plans maybe required and completed by conducting a wildland fire prevention/mitigation assessment. The purpose ofthe plan isto develop a strategy that will identify actions to reduce
unwanted human-caused ignitions, thereby reducing wildland fire damages and losses, unnecessary risks to firefighters, and suppression costs. As fire danger moves from lowto extreme, as defined inan FDOP, and/or human activity increases, prevention and mitigation activities must be increased to maintain effectiveness. The prevention/mitigation plan outlines how the Adjective Fire Danger Ratings are communicated tothe public, and applied, in terms of responsible personnel and assigned activities. Prevention activities are intended to reduce the occurrence of unwanted human-caused fires and include but are not limited to: • Education (signage, school programs, radio and news releases, recreation contacts, local business contacts, exhibits); • Engineering (public utility company, government agency/cooperator coordination); • Enforcement/industrial program monitoring (patrol, permitting, inspections, including firewood cutting, logging, mining, power line maintenance, and area closures); and • Administration (patrol, communication, FDOP, sign and other plans and planning activities). ○ BLM – Refer toBLM MS-9212 – Fire Prevention. ○ NPS – Refer toNPS RM-18 Chapter 6 Prevention and Mitigation. ○ FWS – Prevention assessment determines the requirement fora prevention plan. Refer to Fire Management Handbook, chapter 10. ○ FS – Refer toFSM 5110. ○ BIA – Refer to 90IAM 5-H, BIA Wildfire Prevention Program Handbook. National Fire Prevention Education Teams National fire prevention and education teams (NFPETs) provide unit and agency managers with skilled and mobile personnel who have the ability to supplement or enhance ongoing local wildfire prevention and education activities where hazard or risk is, oris expected tobe, elevated above normal. Teams are highly effective in their ability to reduce unwanted human-caused wildland ignitions and are equipped to rapidly complete onsite prevention assessments and plans, initiate implementation of such plans, andto begin immediate prevention and education activities. A basic team is composed of three personnel with these minimum qualifications: • 1 PETL – Prevention and education team leader; • 1 PETM – Prevention and education team member; and • 1 PIO2 – Public information officer type 2. Actual team composition may include additional support positions, as determined jointly bythe team leader and the ordering unit, ona case-by-case basis, based onthe team’s anticipated tasking. The use of trainees is encouraged. NFPETs can assist the local unit in preventing unwanted human-caused wildfires in several ways. They can assist the local unit to: • Complete fire risk assessments; • Determine the severity ofthe situation; • Facilitate community awareness and education in fire prevention, including prescribed burning; • Coordinate announcement of interagency restrictions and closures; • Coordinate fire prevention efforts with the public, special target groups, State and local agencies, and elected officials; • Promote public and personal responsibility regarding fire prevention inthe wildland/urban interface; and • Assist IMTs in accomplishing their objectives in working with the public to develop fire protection plans. To order an NFPET, place the order with the regional GACCs. See the National Interagency Standards for Resource Mobilization for additional information on ordering and using NFPETs. Fire Danger PocketCards for Firefighter Safety Fire Danger PocketCards provide, through a graphical interpretation of historic fire danger, a means for firefighters to understand the fire potential fora given local area during any day ofthe fire season. PocketCards apply to areas of uniform fire danger rating, known as FDRAs, which should be developed through an interagency FDOP process. (If FDRAs are not defined, PocketCards maybe developed based on other areas of like fire danger.) The PocketCard can also bean ideal tool for local seasonal tracking of fire season severity with the addition of daily indices (see “Local Unit Seasonal Tracking” section). The PocketCards must adhere tothe NWCG standard located at https://www.wildfire.gov/application/pocket-cards.
PocketCards should be updated following a significant fire season, but otherwise, based onthe length ofthe station or Special Interest Group (SIG) dataset: • PocketCards based on stations with a dataset of10 years or less should be updated annually. • PocketCards with more data (10 years or more) should be updated every other year. Inall cases, a high-quality database should be used (5 years of poor data and10 years of good data does not equal 15 years of quality data). Compliance with the standard, including quality, currency, and application ofthe PocketCards, isthe responsibility ofthe local fire management unit. • BLM – Seasonal trend analysis (updated and posted at least every two weeks) isthe only requirement for communication of fire danger; however, offices may use PocketCards in addition toa seasonal trend analysis. Seasonal trend analyses will be prepared atthe Predictive Service Area (PSA) scale or smaller. PSA scale analyses are typically developed and posted online bythe Geographic Area Coordination Center (GACC) while smaller scales are typically developed bythe local unit. Hard copies should be made available in areas with limited internet connectivity. FMOs should ensure incoming and local resources are briefed onthe seasonal trend analysis for their area. • FS – Obtain regional certification for PocketCards. Distribute PocketCards to each fireline supervisor on type 3, 4, and5 complexity wildfires. Units have the option todo more frequent updates if they choose todo so. • BIA – Field-level units will identify the NWCG-compliant Fire Danger PocketCard(s) that represent their lands and ensure they are available toall firefighters and fire management personnel. The NWCG standards for updating and posting the cards canbe found inthe Wildland Fire Application Information Portal https://www.wildfire.gov/application/pocket-cards. Managing Weather Data inthe Weather Information Management System Fire danger requires continual management in order to produce accurate results that are applied ina timely manner. Daily observation variables are processed and calculated automatically in WIMS but need tobe verified regularly to ensure the systems are working correctly. Weather observations should be reviewed at least weekly to catch errors inthe data that may indicate abad RAWS sensor or missing data. Certain RAWS station settings should be adjusted in WIMS to match locally determined values, such as: • Fuel Model Parameters (e.g., perennial vs annual, humid vs moist, etc.) • Growing Season Index Settings Decision points should be reviewed annually and adjusted, as appropriate, based on statistical analysis. If decision points are adjusted, PocketCards should also be validated and updated as necessary. Management Actions for Remote Automatic Weather Stations Noncompliance Report A weekly report from Wildland Fire Management Information (WFMI) module displays RAWS that are more than 1 year and45 days past their annual maintenance date. Fire weather stations areto be maintained annually per NWCG Standards for Fire Weather Stations, PMS 426-3. The report is widely distributed by email and available at https://raws.nifc.gov/standards-guidelines. Ifa RAWS ison the report, ithas either not had annual maintenance, orthe documentation for annual maintenance has not been completed in WFMI. Data from these RAWS should notbe used or used with caution. Portable RAWS Fire managers should ensure that locally held portable RAWS are maintained prior touse. Non-maintained portable RAWS will notbe activated for data processing through WFMI weather. • BLM – Refer to chapter 2for more guidance. Predictive Service Areas Predictive Service Areas (PSA) are sub-geographic areas of similar climate, fuels and topography defined by GACC meteorologists generally for forecasting purposes. The PSAs are also used to display current and forecasted conditions atthe national and geographic area level, such as maps showing 7-Day Significant Fire Potential and statistics graphs of select indices and fuel moistures. While PSAs are defined using similar criteria as Fire Danger Rating Areas (FDRAs), the PSA-based products are intended for longer range prediction purposes and strategic planning atthe sub-geographic scale, and FDRA-based products are intended to guide daily operational decisions atthe unit level.
National Predictive Services Fire Potential Outlooks and Advisories National Significant Wildland Fire Potential Outlook The National Significant Wildland Fire Potential Outlook (Outlook) is prepared and distributed by NICC Predictive Services onthe first dayof each month. The Outlook isa composite of outlooks prepared bythe individual Geographic Area Predictive Services units and national discussions prepared by NICC Predictive Services. The report provides fire managers atall levels with the information needed to make long-range decisions concerning resource staffing and allocation. The Outlook identifies areas where significant wildland fire activity is expected tobe above or below normal levels. The Outlook covers a four-month period. Maps for each period display areas of below normal, normal, and above normal significant wildland fire potential. A brief synopsis ofthe current and predicted national and GACC situation is included inthe report. Specific guidance on issuance and requirements for the Outlook canbe found inthe National Interagency Standards for Resource Mobilization. National 7-Day Significant Fire Potential Outlook The National 7-Day Significant Fire Potential Outlook (7-Day) isa composite of outlooks produced by each ofthe Geographic Area Predictive Services units. The7-Day provides a week-long projection of fuel dryness, weather, and fire potential. The7-Day depicts a nationwide view ofthe significant fire potential for the next seven days with links tothe individual geographic area 7-Day outlooks. The system is database-driven andis updated periodically as each Geographic Area Predictive Services unit posts its outlook. Each Geographic Area Predictive Services unit will determine whether to routinely produce a morning or afternoon product. Issuance times for each area’s outlook canbe found inthe Geographic Area Mobilization Guide and/orin its National Weather Service/Predictive Services Operating Plan. Guidance on issuance and requirements for the 7-Day can be found inthe National Interagency Standards for Resource Mobilization. Fuels and Fire Behavior Advisories Fuels and Fire Behavior Advisories (Advisory) alerts issued as needed to address an exceptional or extreme circumstance that could threaten firefighter or public safety. Conditions that could be reasonably expected normally donot warrant an Advisory. Advisories will focus on fuel conditions and fire behavior that have long-term impacts, not atmospheric conditions that canbe found in other predictive services products. Advisories will highlight and give specific examples of conditions that are currently ongoing and have been experienced inthe field. Advisories should be tailored so that firefighters atall experience levels can recognize the situation and act accordingly. Advisories should be coordinated with neighboring administrative units to ensure that all areas with similar conditions are being addressed. All Advisories that extend beyond a single local administrative unit or that will be posted onthe national Advisory map must be coordinated with the NICC and GACC Predictive Service units. Each Advisory must include amap ofthe affected area. Only one Advisory maybe active atany time over any area. If multiple Advisory conditions are present incorporate them into one Advisory. Advisories will remain in effect for14 days from issuance. Ifthe Advisory conditions continue beyond the14 days anew Advisory will need tobe issued to update conditions and circumstances with more timely information. Atthe request ofthe issuer, Advisories maybe lifted before the14 days has passed. For the Fuels and Fire Behavior Advisory template and protocols, see https://www.predictiveservices.nifc.gov/fuels_fire-danger/fuels_fire-danger.htm. National Intelligence Products See the National Interagency Standards for Resource Mobilization, chapter 60. Local Unit Seasonal Tracking • BLM – Districts can use an FDOP, FDAD, or FWOAD depending on which format best meets their needs. As identified inthe FMP and/or FDOP, each unit selects and compares to normal, the current value and seasonal trend ofone (or more) ofthe following indicators which are most useful in predicting fire season severity and duration inits area. By downloading daily weather observations and adding them tothe database, FFPor similar statistical analysis software canbe used to produce the current NFDRS, CFFDRS, and fuel moisture products, including statistical graphs of various indices and components such as: • NFDRS (or CFFDRS) index and/or component values; • Palmer Drought or Keetch-Byram Drought Index; • 1000-hour fuel moisture; • 100-hour fuel moisture; • Live fuel moisture; and/or • Growing Season Index.
The seasonal trend of each selected indicator is graphically compared to normal and all-time worst (for the historical period analyzed). This comparison is updated regularly and posted in dispatch and crew areas. To compare and display comparisons, usea PocketCard and/or fire danger seasonal graphs, which have been developed and used atthe local unit to inform and educate firefighters on local conditions. PocketCards and seasonal fire danger graphs should use the same index and fuel model to display information so that the two canbe easily compared. Any local seasonal trends of indices/components or fuel moisture values should be communicated tothe GACC Predictive Services unit to augment their assessments. Trends should be monitored throughout the fire season and communication should beon-going, particularly when significant changes inkey indicators occur. Fire Severity Funding Fire severity funding isthe authorized useof suppression operations funds (normally used exclusively for suppression operations and distinct from preparedness funds) for extraordinary preparedness activities that are required dueto: • FMP, FDOP, or operating plan criteria that indicate the need for additional preparedness/suppression resources. The plan(s) should identify thresholds for severity needs. • Anticipated fire activity will exceed the capabilities of local resources. • Fire seasons that either start earlier or last longer than identified inan FDOP. • An abnormal increase in fire potential or danger not planned forin existing preparedness plans. Agency established decision points or thresholds will be used to determine severity funding needs. The objective of fire severity funding isto appropriately manage risk and adjust planned actions and staffing in excess ofthe budgeted program to improve initial response capabilities and wildfire prevention activities when extraordinary weather and fire conditions may result inthe occurrence, or substantial threat of occurrence, of wildfires with significant damage potential. Fire severity funding isnot intended to: • Raise preparedness funding levels to cover differences that may exist between funds actually appropriated and those identified inthe fire planning process. ○ BLM – Refer to chapter 2for more guidance. ○ NPS/FWS/FS – Mitigate threats to Threatened and Endangered Species habitat, wildland/urban interface, or other values identified inL/RMPs. Typical Uses Fire severity funds are typically used to: • Increase prevention activities; • Temporarily increase firefighting staffing; • Pay for standby; • Preposition initial attack suppression forces; • Provide additional aerial reconnaissance; and • Provide for standby aircraft availability. Authorization Authorization touse severity funding is provided in writing based ona written request with supporting documentation. Authorization ison a line-item basis and comes with a severity cost code. Agencies will follow their administrative procedures for issuing severity cost codes. Authorization is provided fora maximum of30 days per request; however, regardless ofthe length ofthe authorization, useof severity funding must be terminated when abnormal conditions no longer exist. Ifthe fire severity situation extends beyond the30-day authorization, the unit/state/region/agencies/Tribes must prepare anew severity request. State/Regional-Level Fire Severity Funding Each fiscal year the national office will provide each state/region with funding anda severity cost code for state/regional short-term severity needs (e.g., wind events, cold dry front passage, lightning events, and unexpected events such asoff-road rallies, cultural events) that are expected to last less than one week. Expenditure of these funds is authorized bythe state/regional directors atthe written request ofthe agency administrator. State/regional directors are responsible and accountable for ensuring that these funds are used only to meet severity funding objectives and that amounts are not exceeded. The national office will notify the state/regional director, state/regional budget officer, and the state/regional FMO when the severity cost code is provided. • BLM – Refer to chapter 2and the BLM Fire Operations website (https://doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/blm- fa/fire-operations/SitePages/Fire-Severity-Preposition.aspx).
• NPS – Parks have the authority to approve “Step-up” actions only, as defined in their FMP. Regional offices approve severity. • FWS – Refer tothe Fire Management Handbook, chapter 10for additional short-term severity guidance. • FS – Severity funding direction is found inFSM 5130 and current fiscal year program direction. • BIA – Regional offices will establish procedures for approval and monitoring short-term severity usage/funds within their respective regions. National-Level Fire Severity Funding National agency fire directors or their delegates are authorized to allocate fire severity funding under specific conditions stated or referenced in this chapter. Expenditure of these funds is authorized bythe appropriate approving official atthe written request ofthe state/regional director. Approved severity funding will be used only for the preparedness activities and timeframes specifically outlined inthe authorization, and only for the objectives stated above. • BLM – Refer to chapter 2and the BLM Fire Operations website for additional guidance. • NPS – Regional offices approve all severity requests. • FWS – Additional information maybe found onthe FWS SharePoint site orthe current US Fish and Wildlife Service Fire Business Guide. • FS – Regional offices approve all severity requests. • BIA – Refer to chapter 6for additional guidance. Appropriate Fire Severity Funding Charges and Activities Severity-funded personnel and resources will not use a severity cost code while assigned to wildfires. The wildfire FireCode number will be used. Labor Appropriate labor charges include: • Regular pay for non-fire personnel; • Regular pay for seasonal/temporary fire personnel outside their normal fire-funded activation period; and • Overtime pay for all fire and non-fire personnel. Severity-funded personnel and resources must be available for immediate initial attack regardless ofthe daily task assignment. Vehicles and Equipment Appropriate vehicle and equipment charges include: • GSA lease rate and mileage; • Hourly rate or mileage for agency-owned vehicles; and • Commercial rentals and contracts. Aviation Appropriate aviation charges include: • Contract extensions; • The daily minimum cost for call-when-needed (CWN) aircraft; • Preposition flight time; and • Support expenses necessary for severity funded aircraft (facility rentals, utilities, telephones, etc.). Travel and Per Diem Severity-funded personnel in travel status are fully subsisted bythe Government in accordance with their agency regulations. Costs covered include: • Lodging; • Government-provided meals (in lieu ofper diem); • Airfare (including returning to their home base); • Privately owned vehicle mileage (with prior approval); and • Other miscellaneous travel and per diem expenses associated with the assignment. Prevention Activities Appropriate prevention activities include: • Funding prevention teams (Prevention teams will be mobilized as referenced inthe National Interagency Standards for Resource Mobilization, chapter 20).
• Implementing local prevention campaigns, to include community risk assessments, mitigation planning, enforcement, outreach, and education • Augmenting patrols Note: Non-fire funded prevention team members should charge Base 8and overtime tothe severity cost code for the length ofthe prevention activities assignment. Fire-funded personnel should charge overtime only tothe severity cost code for the length ofthe prevention activities assignment. Inappropriate Fire Severity Funding Charges The following charges should notbe charged to fire severity: • Shortages between funds actually appropriated (including rescissions) and those identified inthe fire planning process • Administrative surcharges, indirect costs, fringe benefits • Equipment purchases • Purchase, maintenance, repair, or upgrade of vehicles ○ NPS/FWS/BIA – Severity-related repair and maintenance of agency vehicles and equipment maybe funded by severity because they donot have ause rate covering these charges. These charges must be approved bythe national office. • Purchase of radios • Purchase of telephones • Purchase of pumps, saws, and similar suppression equipment • Aircraft availability during contract period • Cache supplies that are normally available in fire caches Interagency Severity Requests Agencies working cooperatively inthe same geographic area must work together to generate and submit joint requests, to minimize duplication of required resources, to reduce interagency costs, andto utilize severity-funded resources inan interagency manner. However, each agency should request funds only for its fair-share contributions or offsets for pooled, interagency resources/activities. The joint request should be routed simultaneously through each agency’s approval system, and the respective approving official will issue an authorization that specifies allocations by agency. Requesting Fire Severity Funding Each agency has established severity funding request protocols. The completed and signed request is submitted from the state/regional director tothe appropriate approving official asper the sequence of action outlined below. Authorizations will be returned in writing. Sequence of Action and Responsible Parties for Severity Funding Requests Action Responsible Party In collaboration with interagency partners, as appropriate, identify and develop severity funding request. Unit FMO Review, modify, and approve (or reject) request. Forward to state/regional office. Unit agency administrator Review, modify, and recommend for approval/rejection unit request. Add state/regional needs and consolidate. Forward to state/regional director for approval within 48 hours. State/regional FMO Review, modify, and approve/reject request. Forward tothe appropriate national fire director/approving official within 48 hours. Notify the fire budget staff. State/regional director Review, modify, and approve/reject the request within 48 hours. Issue written authorization with a severity cost code. Appropriate national fire director/approving official Establish severity cost code inthe appropriate finance system within 24 hours. Applicable national finance system Notify unit office(s) and state/regional budget lead upon receipt of authorization. State/regional FMO Utilize severity cost code. Ensure that project expenditures are only used for authorized purposes. Continually assess needs and submit new requests/extensions as required. Unit FMO Maintain severity files, including requests, authorizations, and summary of expenditures and activities. Unit/state/regional/ national offices
• NPS – All approved severity requests must be uploaded tothe shared OneDrive folder per the Fiscal Year 2021 Wildland Fire Severity Program Oversight Memorandum. • FS – Severity codes are preestablished atthe beginning ofthe fiscal year. Requests are approved atthe regional office with a copy tothe national office for those exceeding $250,000or including national shared resources. Labor Cost Coding for Fire Severity Funded Personnel Fire preparedness personnel outside their normal activation period, employees whose regular salary isnot fire funded, and administratively determined (AD) employees hired under an approved severity request should charge regular time and approved non-fire overtime tothe severity suppression operations subactivity and the requesting office’s severity cost code. Fire preparedness personnel should charge their regular planned salary (Base-8) to their budgeted subactivity using their home unit’s location code. Follow individual agency coding guidance when responding to another agency’s severity request. Regular hours worked in suppression operations will require the use ofthe appropriate fire subactivity with the appropriate FireCode number. Overtime in fire suppression operations will be charged tothe suppression operations subactivity with the appropriate FireCode number. Employees from non-Federal agencies should charge their time in accordance with the approved severity request and the appropriate local and statewide agreements. An interagency agreement for reimbursement must be established. The Interagency Agreement for Fire Management canbe used asa template. • FS – Firefighters under a severity order will continue to charge base salary toaB-code and overtime tothe severity S-code, even ifit is outside their funded tour. If called outto an incident, these resources will be under the same rules of charging base salary toaB-code and overtime tothe P-code. Regions must manage funding of tours within allocations provided. Firefighters working onan incident beyond their planned and funded tour will continue to charge their Base-8 hours toaB-code (Wildland Fire Preparedness Program [WFPR]). Regions must contact WOFAM if they believe they might exceed their allocations. All firefighters charge their Base-8 hours to preparedness job codes—either WFPR oraB-code—unless they are working on other non-fire project work outside of fire season. These situations are accounted forin the allocations by basing the allocations onthe last three years of salary expenditures. Documentation The unit/state/regional and national office will document and file accurate records of severity funding activity. This will include complete severity funding requests, written authorizations, and expenditure records. Severity Funding Reviews State/regional and national offices should ensure appropriate usage of severity funding and expenditures. This maybe done as part ofthe normal agency fire program review cycle. Qualification for Professional Liability Insurance Reimbursement Public Law 110-161 provides for reimbursement forup toone half ofthe cost incurred for professional liability insurance (including any administrative processing cost charged bythe insurance company) for temporary fire line managers, management officials, and law enforcement officers. To qualify for reimbursement, “temporary fire line managers” must meet oneof the following three criteria: • Provide temporary supervision or management of personnel engaged in wildland fire activities; • Provide analysis or information that affects a supervisor’sor manager’s decision about a wildland fire; • Direct the deployment of equipment fora wildland fire, such asa base camp manager, an equipment manager, a helicopter coordinator, oran initial attack dispatcher. ○ DOI – See Personnel Bulletin No. 08-07, March 20, 2008. ○ FS – Refer to https://usdagcc.sharepoint.com/sites/fs-cfo-bfp/MiscPay/SitePages/Home.aspx.
Chapter 11 Incident Management and Response National Response Framework The National Response Framework (NRF) presents the guiding principles that enable all response partners to prepare for and provide a unified national response to disasters and emergencies—from the smallest incident tothe largest catastrophe. The NRF establishes a comprehensive, national, all-hazards approach to domestic incident response. National Incident Management System The National Wildfire Coordinating Group (NWCG) follows the National Incident Management System (NIMS). NIMS provides a universal setof structures, procedures, and standards for agencies to respond toall types of emergencies. NIMS will be used to complete tasks assigned tothe interagency wildland fire community under the NRF. Incident Management and Coordination Components ofthe National Incident Management System Effective incident management requires: • Command organizations to manage onsite incident operations. • Coordination and support organizations to provide direction and supply resources tothe onsite organization. Incident Command System The Incident Command System (ICS) isthe onsite management system used in NIMS. The ICS isa standardized emergency management system specifically designed to provide foran integrated organizational structure that reflects the complexity and demands of single or multiple incidents, without being hindered by jurisdictional boundaries. ICSis the combination of facilities, equipment, personnel, communications, and procedures operating within a common organizational structure to manage incidents. ICS will be used bythe agencies to manage wildland fire operations and all-hazards incidents. Wildfire Complexity Level Wildfires are typed by complexity, from type 5 (least complex) to type 1 (most complex). The ICS organizational structure develops ina modular fashion based onthe complexity ofthe incident. Complexity level is determined by completing Part Eof the NWCG Wildland Fire Risk and Complexity Assessment (RCA), PMS 236. Wildfire Risk and Complexity Assessment NWCG has adopted the RCA form asa replacement for the Incident Complexity Analysis form and the Organizational Needs Assessment form. The RCA assists personnel with evaluating the situation, objectives, risks, and management considerations ofan incident and recommends the appropriate organization necessary to manage the incident, which is documented in Part C. The RCA also includes common indicators of incident complexity to assist firefighters and managers with determining incident management organizational needs. These common indicators are found in Part Eof the RCA. The RCA Part Bcan be used to populate the “Relative Risk Assessment” and Part C “Organization Assessment” portions ofthe Wildland Fire Decision Support System (WFDSS). Command Organizations Incident Command All wildfires, regardless of complexity level, will have an incident commander (IC). TheIC isa single individual responsible tothe agency administrator(s) for all incident activities. ICs are qualified according tothe NWCG Standards for Wildland Fire Position Qualifications, PMS 310-1, and any additional agency requirements. TheIC may assign personnel toany combination ofICS functional area duties in order to operate safely and effectively. ICS functional area duties should be assigned tothe most qualified or competent individuals available. ICs are responsible for: • Obtaining a delegation of authority and/or expectations to manage the incident from the agency administrator. For type 3, 4, or5 incident complexity levels, delegations/expectations maybe written or oral. ○ BLM – ABLM Agency Administrator will provide a written delegation of authority and expectations tothe unit's type 3, 4, and5 ICs annually prior to fire season. • Ensuring that safety receives priority consideration inall incident activities, and that the safety and welfare ofall incident personnel and the public is maintained. Ensure standardized incident and communication center
protocols identified inthe “Medical Incident Report” (MIR) section ofthe Incident Response Pocket Guide (IRPG) are utilized. The MIR is found inthe Medical Plan (ICS-206-WF); • Assessing the incident situation, both immediate and potential; • Maintaining command and control ofthe incident management organization; • Ensuring transfer of command is communicated to host unit dispatch andto all incident personnel; • Assisting with WFDSS documentation and support in close coordination with the local office(s), if requested bythe delegating agency administrator(s); • Developing incident objectives, strategies, and tactics, consistent with the delegation of authority and latest published decision(s) in WFDSS; • Developing the organizational structure necessary to manage the incident; • Approving and implementing the incident action plan (IAP), as needed; • Ordering, deploying, and releasing resources; • Ensuring incident financial accountability and expenditures meet agency policy and standards; and • Ensuring incident documentation is complete. For purposes of initial attack, the first ICon scene qualified atany level will assume the duties of initial attack IC. The initial attack IC will assume the duties and have responsibility for all suppression efforts onthe incident upto his/her level of qualification until relieved byan IC qualified ata level commensurate with incident complexity. Asan incident escalates andde-escalates, a continuing reassessment of complexity should be completed to validate the current command organization or identify the need fora different level of incident management. AnIC is expected to establish the appropriate organizational structure for each incident and manage the incident based onhis/her qualifications, incident complexity, and span of control. Ifthe incident complexity exceeds the qualifications ofthe current IC, theIC must continue to manage the incident within his/her capability and span of control until replaced. Onsite Command Organizations Command organizations responsible for incident management include: • Type 5 incident command • Type 4 incident command • Type 3 incident command • Complex Incident Management Team (CIMT) • National Incident Management Organization (NIMO) • Area command • Unified command Incident Characteristics Type 5 Incident Characteristics • Adhoc organization managed bya type 5IC. • Primarily local resources used. • ICS command and general staff positions are not activated. • Resources vary from twoto six firefighters. • Incident is generally contained within the first burning period and often within afew hours after resources arrive on scene. • Additional firefighting resources or logistical support are not usually required. • May require a published decision in WFDSS. Type 4 Incident Characteristics • Adhoc organization managed bya type 4IC. • Primarily local resources used. • ICS command and general staff positions are not activated. • Resources vary from a single resource to multiple resource task forces or strike teams. • Incident is usually limited toone operational period. However, incidents may extend into multiple operational periods. • Written IAPis not required. A documented operational briefing will be completed for all incoming resources. Refer tothe IRPG fora briefing checklist. • May require a published decision in WFDSS or other decision support document.
Type 3 Incident Characteristics • Adhoc or preestablished type 3 organization managed bya type 3IC. • TheIC develops the organizational structure necessary to manage the incident. Some orall ofICS functional areas are activated, usually atthe division/group supervisor and/or unit leader level. • The incident complexity analysis process is formalized and certified daily with the jurisdictional agency. TheIC is responsible for continually reassessing the complexity level ofthe incident. When the assessment of complexity indicates a higher complexity level, theIC must ensure that suppression operations remain within the scope and capability ofthe existing organization and that span of control is consistent with established ICS standards. • Local and non-local resources used. • Resources vary from several resources to several task forces/strike teams. • Maybe divided into divisions. • May require staging areas and incident base. • May involve low-complexity aviation operations. • May involve multiple operational periods prior to control, which may require a written IAP. • Documented operational briefings will occur for all incoming resources and before each operational period. Refer tothe IRPG fora briefing checklist. • May require a published decision in WFDSS. • May require a written delegation of authority. Type 3 Incident Command ICT3s will not serve concurrently asa single resource boss or have any non-incident-related responsibilities. PMS 310-1 qualifications as operations section chief type 3 (OPS3), planning section chief type 3 (PSC3), logistics section chief type 3 (LSC3), and finance section chief type 3 (FSC3) are required for national mobilization. Reference the 2025 National Interagency Standards for Resource Mobilization, chapter 20, for type 3IMT standards when mobilizing across geographic area boundaries. A local unit may assign adhoc type 3 organizations appropriately configured tothe incident. The following position standards canbe used for local incidents: Type 3 Functional Responsibility Minimum Qualification Standards for Local Incidents Safety Safety officer type 3 (SOF3) Division Single resource boss – Operational qualification must be commensurate with resources assigned (i.e., more than one resource assigned requires a higher level of qualification). Information Local entities can establish level of skill to perform function. Type 1and Type 2 Incident Complexity Indicators • Refer to Part Eof the NWCG Wildland Fire Risk and Complexity Assessment (RCA). Incident Management Teams Area Command Area command isan ICS organization established to: • Oversee the management of large or multiple incidents to which several IMTs have been assigned. Area command may become unified area command when incidents are multi-jurisdictional; or • Provide strategic support and coordination services to decision makers such as geographic area multi-agency coordination (MAC) groups, sub-geographic area MAC groups (GMAC), agency administrators, Geographic Area Coordination Centers (GACC), emergency operations centers, agency operations centers, or FEMA joint field offices. The primary determining factor for establishing area command isthe span of control ofthe agency administrator. Area command maybe ordered when needed and composed ofthe positions necessary to achieve the desired objectives. Area command qualifications are found inthe PMS 310-1. Area command functions typically include: • Establishing overall strategy, objectives, and priorities for the incident(s) under its command; • Allocating critical resources according to agency priorities (e.g., aircraft, IHCs, incident support needs such as medical services, communication and internet operability equipment);
• Ensuring that incidents are properly managed; • Coordinating mobilization, team transitions, and demobilization; • Supervising, managing, and evaluating IMTs under its command; and • Minimizing duplication of effort and effectiveness by combining multiple agency efforts under a single area or geographic theater plan. See appendix Jfor the Area Command (AC) Complexity Assessment template. Complex Incident Management Teams (CIMTs) Complex incident management teams are jointly managed bythe GACG/GACCs and the NMAC through the NICC. CIMTs maybe mobilized to type 1and type 2 complexity incidents and are scalable in size and capability to meet the needs ofthe incident. Specific information regarding CIMT configuration, availability rotation, and management canbe found inthe National Interagency Standards for Resource Mobilization. National Incident Management Organization National Incident Management Organization (NIMO) teams are managed bythe Forest Service Fire and Aviation’s Washington Office and are ordered through the National Interagency Coordination Center (NICC). The mission of NIMO isto promote continuous improvement by introducing innovative concepts, approaches, and technologies while providing adaptive and agile incident management. NIMO’s standard configuration consists of seven command and general staff positions qualified atthe type 1 level. If needed, NIMO can expand to meet various complexity levels. Types of NIMO assignments include: • National or geographic area/regional support to provide strategic planning assistance. • Work with less qualified or experienced Command and General Staff on incidents for successional planning. • Serve as mentors, trainers, and evaluators ona type 2or type 3 incident complexity level or designated projects. • Manage multiple type 3 ignitions within an area (e.g., GACC, forest, zone). • Support and mentor agency administrators with a complex fire situations. • International assignments. • All-hazards incidents. • Mission-specific assignments – NIMO will continue to assist Forest Service units and other agencies with special missions (e.g., R2 Bark Beetle, R5 marijuana eradication, or regional support during higher planning/activity levels). Non-Federal Type 1and Type 2 Incident Management Teams Some type 1and type 2 IMTs are managed bynon-Federal agencies (e.g., State or local governments) and availability of these teams is determined ona case-by-case basis. Unified Command Unified command isan application ofICS used when there is more than one agency with incident jurisdiction or when incidents cross political jurisdictions. Under unified command, agencies work together through their designated ICsat a single incident command post to establish common objectives and issue a single IAP. Unified command maybe established atany level of incident management or area command. Under unified command, all agencies with jurisdictional responsibility atthe incident contribute tothe process of: • Determining overall strategies; • Selecting alternatives; • Ensuring that joint planning for tactical activities is accomplished; and • Maximizing useof all assigned resources. Advantages of unified command are: • A single setof objectives is developed for the entire incident; • A collective approach is used to develop strategies to achieve incident objectives; • Information flow and coordination is improved between all jurisdictions and agencies involved inthe incident; • All involved agencies have an understanding of joint priorities and restrictions; and • No agency’s legal authorities will be compromised or neglected. All-Hazards and Other Non-Wildland Fire Many different entities have developed IMTs based onICS core competencies under NIMS. See chapter 8for more information.
Coordination and Support Organizations Organizations that provide coordination and support to onsite command organizations include: • Initial attack dispatch • Expanded dispatch • Buying/payment teams • NICC and GACCs (refer to chapter 8) • Local, geographic area, and national multi-agency coordinating (MAC) groups Refer to chapter 19for initial attack and expanded dispatch information. Buying/Payment Teams Buying/payment teams support incidents by procuring services, supplies, and renting land, facilities, and equipment. These teams maybe ordered when incident support requirements exceed local unit capacity. These teams report tothe agency administrator orthe local unit administrative officer. See the NWCG Standards for Interagency Incident Business Management for more information. Multi-Agency Coordination Multi-agency coordination (MAC) groups are part of NIMS and are an expansion ofthe off-site coordination and support system. MAC groups are activated bythe agency administrator(s) when the character and intensity ofthe emergency situation significantly impacts or involves other agencies. AMAC group maybe activated to provide support when only one agency has incident(s). The MAC group is made upof agency representatives who are delegated authority by their respective agency administrators to make agency decisions andto commit agency resources and funds. The MAC group relieves the incident support organization (dispatch, expanded dispatch) ofthe responsibility for making key decisions regarding prioritization of objectives and allocation of critical resources. The MAC group makes coordinated agency administrator-level decisions on issues that affect multiple agencies. The MAC group is supported by situation, resource status, and intelligence units who collect and assemble data through normal coordination channels. MAC group direction is carried out through dispatch and coordination center organizations. When expanded dispatch is activated, the MAC group direction is carried out through the expanded dispatch organization. The MAC group organization does not operate directly with IMTs or with area command teams, which are responsible for onsite management ofthe incident. MAC groups maybe activated atthe local, geographic, or national level. National-level and geographic-area-level MAC groups should be activated in accordance with the preparedness levels criteria established in national and geographic area mobilization guides. The MAC group coordinator facilitates organizing and accomplishing the mission, goals, and direction ofthe MAC group. The MAC group coordinator: • Provides expertise onthe functions ofthe MAC group andon the proper relationships with dispatch centers and incident managers • Fills and supervises necessary unit and support positions as needed, in accordance with coordination complexity • Arranges for and manages facilities and equipment necessary to carry out the MAC group functions • Facilitates the MAC group decision process • Implements decisions made bythe MAC group Activation ofa MAC group improves interagency coordination and provides for allocation and timely commitment of multi-agency emergency resources. Participation by multiple agencies inthe MAC effort will improve: • Overall situation status information; • Incident priority determination; • Resource acquisition and allocation; • State and Federal disaster coordination; • Political interfaces; • Consistency and quality of information provided tothe media and involved agencies; and • Anticipation of future conditions and resource needs. Wildland Fire Decision Support System Disclaimer: The Wildland Fire Decision Support System (WFDSS) platform was updated and replaced by WFDSS NextGen on March 26, 2025. Updates to terminology and application processes with WFDSS NextGen is being developed and will be released inthe 2026 version ofthe Red Book. Information about WFDSS NextGen canbe found at: https://wfdss.firenet.gov/help/Content/Home.htm.
The Wildland Fire Decision Support System (WFDSS) isa web-based decision support system that provides a single dynamic documentation system for use beginning atthe time of discovery and concluding when the fire is declared out. WFDSS isthe decision support documentation platform for all Federal wildfires. WFDSS allows the agency administrator to describe and assess the fire situation, review completed fire behavior analysis products, develop incident objectives and requirements, develop a course of action, evaluate relative risk, complete an organization assessment, document the rationale, and publish a decision. Units are encouraged to engage in preseason planning that familiarizes staff with fire-related guidance and direction from land/resource management plans (L/RMP) and/or fire management plans (FMPs), facilitates cooperation among resource areas and with neighboring units, and establishes protection priorities proactively ahead of fire season. Annual WFDSS refreshers, preferably with agency administrator attendance, are encouraged but are only one component ofa unit’s overall preseason planning strategy. For detailed information onthe tools and capabilities in WFDSS, how managers may use the tools, and suggested WFDSS refresher training items, refer to appendix Kand https://wfdss.usgs.gov/wfdss/WFDSS_Home.shtml. The Integrated Reporting of Wildfire Information (IRWIN) data exchange system automatically populates some fields onthe WFDSS information tab (e.g., incident name, point of origin) for those using a computer-aided dispatch (CAD) orthe Interagency Fire Occurrence Reporting Modules (InFORM) system. Once a record is created inCAD, FireCode, Interagency Resource Ordering Capability (IROC) system, ICS-209, or InFORM, those fires will automatically have a record created in WFDSS. In order to publish a decision consistent with theL/RMP, applicable fire-related protection and resource management objectives and requirements from L/RMP and/or FMPs must be incorporated preseason into the WFDSS via the “Data Management” tab. • NPS – NPS recommends preloading management direction into WFDSS during preseason. • FWS/BIA – FWS and BIA units are not required to preload management direction into WFDSS. A published decision documents: • Strategic direction from L/RMP and/or FMPs; • Incident objectives and requirements; • Incident management strategies and courses of action; • Estimated costs for the duration ofthe incident; • All affected jurisdictions that participated inthe decision process and concurred with the strategies selected; • Agency administrator(s) has reviewed and approved the decision; and • The framework for the actions tobe performed under the delegation of authority which authorizes anIC to operate ona specific unit(s). See “Agency Administrator Responsibilities” under “Managing the Incident” heading for delegation of authority specifics. The level of documentation ina decision should be commensurate with incident complexity, cost, and/or potential duration and spread. As incident complexity changes, additional analysis maybe necessary to inform decision making. Initial Decision All fires will have a published decision within WFDSS when they: • Escape initial attack; or • Exceed initial response; or • Include objectives with both protection and resource benefit elements consistent with land management planning documents. Agency-specific direction established in memorandums or other policy documents may further define WFDSS documentation requirements. agency administrator roles and responsibilities are addressed in agency chapters 2-6. Additional considerations for determining that a decision maybe needed include: • The fire affects oris likely to affect more than one agency or more than one administrative unit within a single agency (for example more than one national forest); • The fire is burning into or expected to burn into the wildland urban interface; • Significant safety or other concerns such asair quality are present or anticipated; and • The relative risk assessment indicates the need for additional evaluation and development of best management practices for achieving land and resource objectives.
New Decision Anew decision is required when: • The periodic assessment indicates the course of action isno longer valid; or • The fire moves beyond the planning area; or • The incident exceeds an established agency threshold (cost or complexity) for approval authority; or • The risk and complexity assessment indicates that the incident exceeds existing management capability. Considerations for determining when anew decision maybe needed: • Costs are expected to exceed the estimated final costs inthe current decision; or • Management action points have changed since the current decision was published. Additional information about WFDSS canbe found in appendix K. User support information, training materials, and other resources canbe found at https://wfdss.usgs.gov/wfdss/WFDSS_Home.shtml. Wildland Fire Decision Support System Decision Approval and Publication All agencies having jurisdiction within a WFDSS planning area must be provided the opportunity to participate as soon as possible inthe decision-making process. In situations where one agency provides fire protection under agreement or contract toa jurisdictional agency, both jurisdictional and protecting agencies should be involved inthe process. In order for one Federal agency administrator tobe delegated authority asan “Approver” for another agency, a preseason agreement describing those authorities maybe needed; see your agency’s delegation of authority policies for additional guidance. Every wildfire decision will consider the development of protection objectives which also provide for safety of firefighter and the public and minimize the loss of, and damage to, property, cultural and natural resources. • FS – Decisions are required to include protection objectives. Regional foresters must approve WFDSS decisions that include objectives to pursue resource benefits at Geographic and/or National PL4/5. See chapter 5for more information. Units considering developing a decision fora group of fires, merged fires, ora complex should reference Best Management Practices for Incident Complexes for considerations until functionality is updated within the system. The cost estimate shown inthe WFDSS “Cost” tab will represent estimated final cost for the incident and should be developed based on historic fire costs, estimation spreadsheets, or other sources. Ifto-date incident expenditures exceed WFDSS estimated fire costs, the final cost estimate must be updated and validated through a periodic assessment ora new decision. For DOI bureaus, to-date agency costs that exceed the decision authority ofthe agency administrator require the publication ofa new decision and/or notification as described inthe Approval Authorities table. Approval of WFDSS wildfire decisions by agency administrators constitutes awareness of estimated final fire costs for the incident. Decisions in WFDSS are approved and published bythe appropriate line officer(s) and/or authorized agency administrator(s) for the agency(s) participating inthe decision. Agency administrator authority is defined inthe tables below but may be subject tore-delegation or reservation of authority. As approvers of WFDSS decisions, agency administrators will ensure that periodic assessments are completed until the fire is declared out. Wildland Fire Decision Support System Decision Approval Authorities by Agency DOI WFDSS Approval Authorities Cost Estimate1 WFDSS Approval2, 5 Less Than $5 Million BLM district manager3 NPS park superintendent FWS refuge manager BIA agency superintendent $5 Million - $10 Million BLM district manager3 NPS park superintendent4 FWS/BIA regional director5, 6 Greater Than $10 Million BLM district manager3 NPS park superintendent4 FWS National Director5 BIA Bureau Director6
1DOI – Cost estimate should be based on estimated final cost ofthe incident. 2Alaska – Alaska WFDSS decisions require an additional approval from the protecting agency fire management officer asper the Alaska Statewide Operating Plan. In addition, Alaska WFDSS decisions affecting Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (ANCSA) Corporation lands and DOI lands not managed byBLM require an additional approval from the Alaska Fire Service (AFS) asthe fiscally responsible agent. Fiscal approvals for these wildfires with costs less than $5 million are delegated toAFS zone FMOs. Fiscal approvals for these wildfires with costs of $5 million and above are delegated tothe State FMO/Alaska Fire Service Manager. 3BLM – Ifthe District Manager isnot a qualified Agency Administrator (AADM), they may not exercise this authority but may re-delegate it. Itmay only bere-delegated toa qualified BLM AADM. See chapter 2for fire cost notification requirements. 4NPS – Park superintendents will provide written notification tothe regional director when an incident meets or exceeds Federal combined expenditures of $5 million in suppression costs, and more than 50% ofthe burned acres are managed bythe NPS. Park superintendents will provide written notification tothe regional and agency director when an incident meets or exceeds Federal combined expenditures of $10 million in suppression costs, and more than 50% ofthe burned acres are managed bythe NPS. Written notifications should be emailed with a copy tothe Chief, Branch of Wildland Fire. 5FWS – Regional directors and National Director may delegate WFDSS approval authority. In Alaska, WFDSS approval authority has been delegated to Refuge Managers for all FWS fires. See chapter 4for Alaska cost threshold reporting requirements. 6BIA – Current policy requiring the Bureau Director to approve decisions over 10 million dollars is delegated toBIA regional directors per agency memorandum. Incident Complexity FS Agency Administrator Qualification Level1 Type 1 Wildfire Agency Administrator Type 1 (WFA1) Type 2 Wildfire Agency Administrator Type 2 (WFA2) Type 3, 4, 5 Wildfire Agency Administrator Type 3 (WFA3) 1Authority maybe retained atthe regional forester level. If internet connections or servers are unavailable, WFDSS documentation will be completed using the “temporary WFDSS paper form” and entered into the web-based application as soon asit becomes available. Wildland Fire Decision Support System Decision Support The Wildland Fire Management Research Development and Application (WFMRD&A) group provides the national infrastructure for wildland fire decision making and WFDSS support. Field users should contact their WFDSS geographic area editor for assistance prior to contacting WFMRD&A staff. Information for requesting assistance from WFMRD&Acan be found onthe WFDSS homepage. Managing the Incident Agency Administrator Definition An agency administrator isthe official responsible for the management ofa geographic unit or functional area. Agency administrators are the managing officer ofan agency, division thereof, or jurisdiction having statutory responsibility for incident mitigation and management. Some examples include NPS park superintendent, BIA agency superintendent, USFS forest supervisor, BLM district manager, FWS refuge manager, State forester, Tribal chairperson, fire chief, police chief. Some agencies may have specific requirements for individuals tobe able to serve asan Agency Administrator. • This recommendation is based onthe Federal Wildland Fire Qualifications Supplement, which shows the following federal agencies require training in addition to holding a certain position inan organization: BLM, BIA, NPS, USFWS, USFS and Department ofthe Army. Agency Administrator Responsibilities The agency administrator manages the land and resources on their organizational unit according tothe established land management plan. Fire management is part of that responsibility. Agency administrators are responsible for safety oversight and may request additional safety oversight as needed. Situations that may require additional safety oversight: • A fire escapes initial attack or when extended attack is probable; • There is complex or critical fire behavior; • There isa complex air operation;
• The fire isin an urban intermix/interface; and • Other extraordinary circumstances. The agency administrator establishes specific performance objectives for the ICand delegates the authority tothe ICto take specific actions to meet those objectives. Agency administrator responsibilities toan IMT include: • Conduct an initial briefing tothe IMT (appendix D). • Provide an approved WFDSS published decision. ○ FS – Ensure that significant decisions related to strategy and costs are included in WFDSS. • Complete anRCA to accompany the WFDSS published decision. ○ BLM – Completion ofthe Relative Risk and Organization Assessment within WFDSS satisfies the need foran RCA. ○ FS – Complete anRCA for type 1, 2, and3 complexity incidents within WFDSS. • Coordinate with neighboring agencies on multi-jurisdiction fires to issue a joint delegation of authority and develop a single published decision in WFDSS for the management of unplanned ignitions. • Issue a written delegation of authority tothe IC (appendix E) andto other appropriate officials, agency administrator representative, resource advisor, and incident business advisor. The delegation should: ○ State specific and measurable objectives, priorities, expectations, agency administrator’s intent, constraints, and other required direction; ○ Establish the specific time for transfer of command; ○ Assign clear responsibilities for initial attack; ○ Define your role inthe management ofthe incident; ○ Describe procedures for conducting action reviews with theIC; ○ Define public information responsibilities; ○ Address accident investigation procedures and notification requirements for fire managers, line officer(s), and dispatch/coordination centers; ○ Assign a local government liaison tothe IMT (if necessary); ○ Assign a local fire management liaison tothe IMT (if necessary); ○ Assign an incident business advisor (INBA) to provide incident business management oversight commensurate with complexity; and ○ Direct the IMT to address rehabilitation of areas affected by suppression activities. • Coordinate mobilization with theIC. ○ Negotiate filling of mobilization order with theIC; ○ Establish time and location of agency administrator briefing; ○ Consider approving support staff additional tothe IMTas requested bythe IC; and ○ Consider authorizing transportation needs as requested bythe IC. • Provide pertinent support materials and documents (L/RMP, FMP, GIS data, local unit SOPs, maps, service and supply plan, etc.) tothe IMT. In situations where one agency provides fire protection under agreement tothe jurisdictional agency, both jurisdictional and protecting agencies will be involved inthe development ofthe delegation of authorities tothe IMTs and the published decision in WFDSS. Agency Administrator Representative Responsibilities The agency administrator representative (theon-scene representative for the agency administrator) is responsible for representing the political, social, and economic issues ofthe agency administrator tothe IC. This is accomplished by participating inthe agency administrator briefing, inthe IMT planning and strategy meetings, andin the operational briefings. Responsibilities include representing the agency administrator tothe IMT regarding: • Compliance with the delegation of authority and the published decision in WFDSS • Public concerns (air quality, road or trail closures, smoke management, threats) • Public safety (evacuations, access/use restrictions, temporary closures) • Public information (fire size, resources assigned, threats, concerns, appeals for assistance) • Socioeconomic, political, or Tribal concerns • Land and property ownership concerns • Interagency and intergovernmental issues • Wildland urban interface impacts • Media contacts
Resource Advisor Responsibilities Members ofthe resource advising group (Archaeologist (ARCH), Resource Advisor, Coordinator (REAC), Resource Advisor (READ), and Resource Advisor, Fireline (REAF)) are responsible for anticipating the impacts of fire operations on natural and cultural resources and for communicating protection requirements to those managing the incident. Advisors should ensure IMT compliance with the law, regulation, and policy for the protection of these resources. The resource advising group should provide information, analysis, and advice on these areas: • Rehabilitation requirements and standards; • Hazardous materials; • Water sources and ownership; • Critical watersheds; • Protected and sensitive wildlife areas; • Potential impacts to local wildlife species; • Noxious weeds/aquatic invasive species; • Special status species (threatened, endangered, proposed, sensitive); • Fisheries; • Poisonous plants, insects, and venomous snakes; • Mineral resources (oil, gas, mining activities); • Archaeological sites, historic trails, paleontological sites, and traditional cultural properties; • Riparian areas including retardant buffers; • Military issues; • Utility rights-of-way (power, communication sites); • Native allotments; • Grazing allotments; • Recreational areas; and • Special management areas (wilderness areas, wilderness study areas, recommended wilderness, inventoried roadless areas, national monuments, national conservation areas, national historic landmarks and structures, areas of critical environmental concern, research natural areas, wild and scenic rivers, trails). Depending onthe complexity and duration ofthe incident, members ofthe resource advising group maybe amix of local and out of area personnel. Although present onthe fireline, the members ofthe resource advising group report tothe agency administrator. Duties are stated inthe Resource Advisor’s Guide for Wildland Fire, PMS 313. Useof Trainees Useof trainees is encouraged. On wildland fire incidents, trainees may supervise trainees. However, when assigning trainees to positions where critical life-safety decisions are affected, trainees must be directly supervised bya fully qualified individual. For example: • A division/group supervisor (DIVS) trainee may not work directly foran operations section chief without additional field supervision. The potential for high-hazard work with high-risk outcomes calls fora fully qualified DIVS tobe assigned supervision ofthe DIVS trainee. • A supply unit leader (SPUL) trainee may supervise a receiving/distribution manager (RCDM) trainee. In this case, supervision maybe successfully provided ina lower-hazard environment with appropriate risk mitigation. Incident Record Creation Local dispatch centers have the responsibility and authority to create incident records, process requests, coordinate response, and track resources and information under the delegation ofthe benefiting agency. Business rules regarding creation of incidents within an integrated system are located in chapter 19 under subheading “Initial Attack Dispatching.” Incident Action Plan When a written IAPis required, suggested components may include objectives, organization, weather forecast, fire behavior forecast, division assignments, air operations summary, safety message, communications plan, and incident map. An incident medical plan is required inall written IAPs. Incident Status Reporting The Incident Status Summary (ICS-209), submitted tothe GACC, is used to report large wildland fires and any other significant events on lands under Federal protection or Federal ownership. Lands administered by States and other Federal cooperators may also report in this manner. Large fires are classified as100 acres or larger in timber fuel types, 300 acres or larger in grass fuel types, or when a NIMO or complex IMTis assigned, regardless ofthe size ofthe incident orthe suppression management strategy. AnICS-209 should be submitted daily for all uncontained full-suppression wildfires that meet large fire criteria. AnICS-209 should be submitted weekly (Thursday evening) for all wildfires meeting large fire criteria that are being managed under strategies that are less than full suppression. The agency administrator may require additional reporting times. Refer to local, zone, and/or GACC guidance for additional reporting requirements. Incident History and Financial Records Wildfire incidents on Federal lands managed bythe FSand DOI (except BIA) require creation ofan incident history file (IHF) to document significant events, actions taken, lessons learned, and other information with long-term value for managing natural resources. IHF contents, instructions, and tools for creating the IHF are found at https://www.nwcg.gov/committees/incident-planning-subcommittee. The host unit will be responsible for retaining the incident documentation package including the IHF and financial records. Document and Computer Security Precautions must be taken to secure incident information inits various formats. All forms of information shall be treated as Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI) and care must be exercised when handling the data to prevent the inadvertent viewing or unauthorized disclosure of information. CUI paper copies that compromise privacy and security shall be shredded before disposal when no longer needed. All computers used atthe incident must be patched and have anti-virus software installed with recently updated definition files. All media used to transfer information into the incident (for example, USB flash drives, portable hard drives andCD/DVDs) must be scanned prior touse. Autorun capabilities must be disabled to prevent the spread of malware. All computers and storage devices shall be physically secured atall times. Transfer of Command The following guidelines will assist inthe transfer of incident command responsibilities from the local unit to incoming IMT and back tothe local unit. • The local team or organization already in place remains in charge until the local representatives brief their counterparts onthe incoming team, a delegation of authority has been signed, anda mutually agreed time for transfer of command has been established. • The ordering unit will specify times of arrival and transfer of command and discuss these timeframes with both the incoming and outgoing command structures. • Clear lines of authority must be maintained in order to minimize confusion and maintain operational control. • Transfers of command should occur atthe beginning ofan operational period, whenever possible. • All operational personnel will be notified on incident command frequencies when transfer of command occurs. Release of Incident Management Teams The release ofan IMT should follow an approved transfer of command process. The agency administrator must approve the date and time ofthe transfer of command. The transfer of command plan should include the following elements: • Remaining organizational needs and structure; • Tasks or work tobe accomplished; • Communication systems and radio frequencies; • Local safety hazards and considerations; • IAP, including remaining resources and weather forecast; • Facilities, equipment, and supply status; • Arrangement for feeding remaining personnel; • Financial and payment processes needing follow-up; and • NWCG Wildland Fire Risk and Complexity Assessment. Team Evaluation At completion of assignment, ICs will receive a written performance evaluation from the agency administrator(s) prior tothe team’s release from the incident. Certain elements of this evaluation may not be able tobe completed atthe closeout review. These include accountability and property control, completeness of claims investigation/documentation, and completeness of financial and payment documentation. The final evaluation incorporating allof the above elements should be sent tothe ICand the respective GACC within 60 days. See https://www.nifc.gov/nicc/logistics/reference-documents for the Interagency Incident Management Team (IMT) Incident Evaluation form. The delegation of authority, the published decision in WFDSS, and other documented agency administrator’s direction will serve asthe primary standards against which the IMT is evaluated.
The agency administrator will provide a copy ofthe evaluation tothe ICand the state/regional FMO and retain a copy for the final fire package. The state/regional FMO will review all evaluations and will be responsible for providing a copy of evaluations documenting performance tothe Geographic Area Coordinating Group or agency managing the IMT. Unit/Area Closures Threats to public safety may require temporary closure ofa unit/area ora portion ofit. When a fire threatens escape from the unit/area, adjacent authorities must be given as much advance notice as possible in order to achieve orderly evacuation. Incident Emergency Management Planning and Services Refer to chapter 7for further guidance. Fire Management in Wilderness Actions taken in wilderness will be conducted to protect life and safety, to meet natural and cultural resource objectives, andto minimize negative impacts ofthe fire management actions and the fires themselves. In evaluating fire management actions, the preservation of wilderness character will be considered before, and given significantly more weight than, economic efficiency and convenience. Unless human life or private property is immediately threatened, only those actions that preserve wilderness character and/or have localized, short-term adverse impacts to wilderness character will be acceptable. Any delegation of authority to IMTs will convey appropriate emphasis onthe preservation of wilderness character and resources and will ensure interaction with resource advisor(s) with expertise in wilderness stewardship. • BLM – BLM Manual 6340—Management ofBLM Wilderness (2012), Section 1.6.C.7 states that tothe greatest extent possible, the Bureau will manage all wildfires in wilderness: 1) using Minimum Impact Strategies Tactics (MIST) wherever possible; 2) if feasible, without equipment that would ordinarily be prohibited under Section 4(c) ofthe Wilderness Act; and3) by assigning a resource advisor with expertise in wilderness stewardship. To assist in documenting any decision involving uses generally prohibited bythe Wilderness Act (e.g., heavy equipment, chainsaws, and the landing of aircraft, among other examples), the BLM normally uses a tool known asthe Minimum Requirements Decision Guide (MRDG). Under the Wilderness Act, however, control of fire isan exception tothe prohibited uses, sothe MRDG isnot necessary atthe time of response toan emergency. Nevertheless, the minimum requirements concept should be incorporated into emergency planning so that the minimum necessary methods and tools canbe used to resolve emergencies while preserving wilderness character tothe greatest extent practicable. Responses involving prohibited uses will be approved bythe state director, though approval canbe delegated through the BLM MS-1203 – DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY tothe district or field office manager ifhe/she has been through the National or Regional Wilderness Stewardship Training offered bythe Arthur Carhart National Wilderness Training Center. In emergency situations, the decision on authorization of normally prohibited uses should always erron the side of protecting human life. • NPS – For all wilderness fire management actions proposing the use ofany ofthe Wilderness Act Section 4(c) prohibitions, a minimum requirements analysis (MRA) will be completed. To ensure adequate consideration of wilderness resources, a programmatic MRA must be completed as part ofthe development ofa park’sFMP and companion environmental compliance document. • FWS – For all wilderness fire management actions proposing the use ofany ofthe Wilderness Act4(c) prohibitions, a minimum requirements analysis will be completed. • FS – For all wilderness fire management actions proposing the use ofany Wilderness Act4(c) prohibitions, a minimum requirements analysis is recommended. • BLM/NPS/FWS/FS – Section 4(d)(1) ofthe Wilderness Actof 1964 allows all agencies to control fire, in wilderness areas, subject to such conditions asthe Secretary deems desirable. • BIA – For all wilderness fire management actions refer toL/RMPs. Operational Guidelines for Aquatic Invasive Species In order to prevent the spread of aquatic invasive species, fire personnel must recognize how our fire operations can prevent the transport of these species. The NWCG Invasive Species Subcommittee provides up-to-date operational guidelines, best management practices, and equipment cleaning guidance to minimize the spread of aquatic invasive species. Local area or agency guidelines may also be available and useful and local biologists, resource advisors, and fire personnel should consult with each other during the preseason regarding known aquatic invasive species locations to facilitate incident avoidance when possible. To minimize potential transmission of aquatic invasive species, itis recommended that personnel:
• Consult with local biologists, resource advisors, and fire personnel for known aquatic invasive species locations inthe area and avoid them when possible. • Avoid entering (driving through) water bodies orwet areas when possible. • Avoid transferring water between drainages or between unconnected waters within the same drainage when possible. • Avoid sucking organic and bottom material into water intakes when drafting from a natural water body. • Avoid obtaining water from multiple sources during a single operational period when possible. • Remove all plant parts and mud from external surfaces of gear and equipment after an operational period. • If gear contacts untreated water, consider decontaminating before moving tonew drainages. Applicable gear includes helicopter buckets, snorkel ends, foot valves, and draft hoses. Water delivery equipment and accessories (e.g., fireline hoses, wye valves, nozzles) that donot transfer tank water to waterbodies donot need tobe disinfected. • For decontamination and cleaning protocols, refer to NWCG Invasive Species Subcommittee guidance or local area or agency direction. NWCG protocols emphasize hot water, power washing, or drying over the use of chemicals. • Carry spare, clean, dry helicopter buckets, draft hoses, and foot valves to switch out with used ones when moving toa new water source. Decontaminate the wet gear while spares are being used. • Prime engine pumps with water from the drafting source (e.g., streams, lake) rather than using water from the engine tank. This minimizes the leakage of possibly contaminated engine tank water through the foot valve. Ensure foot valves are operating and not leaking. Decontamination of engine or water tender tanks with hot water or chemicals isnot recommended. Operational Guidelines for Invasive Species Suppression and support vehicles, tools, and machinery should be cleaned ata designated area prior to arriving and leaving the incident. Onsite fire equipment, including the undercarriage, fender wells, tires, radiator, and exterior ofthe vehicle, should be thoroughly cleaned. Firefighter personnel should clean items such as personal equipment, boots, clothing of weed or other invasive species materials, including visible plant parts, soil, and other materials as identified bythe resource advisor(s). The cleaning area should also be clearly marked to identify the area for post- fire control treatments, as needed. Ensure that seed mixes and mulch used in suppression repair contain no federally or State-designated noxious weeds by using seed mixes and mulches that have been examined bya laboratory or have current weed-free certification from a State seed laboratory or equivalent qualified testing agent. Responding toNon-Wildland Fire Incidents Managers will avoid giving the appearance that their wildland fire resources are trained and equipped to perform structure, vehicle, and dump fire suppression, to respond to hazardous materials releases, orto perform emergency medical response for the public. Wildland Urban Interface The operational roles ofthe Federal agencies as partners inthe wildland urban interface are wildfire suppression, structure protection (not structural fire suppression), prescribed fire, hazard reduction, cooperative prevention and education, and technical assistance. Structural fire suppression isthe responsibility of Tribal, State, or local governments. Federal agencies may assist with exterior structural fire protection activities under formal fire protection agreements that specify the mutual responsibilities ofthe partners, including funding (some Federal agencies have full structural protection authority for their facilities on lands they administer and may also enter into formal agreements to assist State and local governments with structural protection). – Review and Update ofthe 1995 Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy, January 2001, page 23 Funding isnot provided to prepare foror respond to emergency non-wildland fire response activities such as structure fires, vehicle fires, dump fires, hazardous materials releases, and emergency medical responses. Managers must ensure that FMPs, interagency agreements, and operating plans clearly state agency and cooperator roles and responsibilities for non-wildland fire response activities that agency personnel are exposed toas a result of working inthe interagency fire environment. Managers will also ensure that Federal wildland fire resources are not identified onrun cards orin dispatch plans for non-wildland fire responses.
Structure, Vehicle, Dumpster, Trash, and Landfill Fires Wildland firefighters will not take direct suppression action on structure, vehicle, dumpster, trash, or landfill fires. Structure, vehicle, and landfill fire suppression isnot a functional responsibility of wildland fire resources. These fires have the potential to emit high levels of toxic gases. This policy will be reflected in suppression response plans. Wildland firefighters who encounter structure, vehicle, or landfill fires, orwho are dispatched to such fires dueto significant threat to adjacent agency-protected lands/resources, will not engage in direct suppression action. Structure protection (not suppression) activities will be limited to exterior efforts, and only when such actions canbe accomplished safely andin accordance with established wildland fire operations standards. • NPS – For structural fire (including vehicle, trash and dumpster fires) response, training, medical examination, and physical fitness requirements, and hazardous material response or control guidance, refer to chapter 3. • FS – Wildfires other than vegetation (such as dumpster, trash, landfill, or vehicle) asthe primary fuel present hazards that are outside ofthe basic wildland firefighters training and protective equipment. Response actions will be limited to protection of life, property, and resources when they canbe safely undertaken with proper risk assessment and mitigation. When agency employees are trained, qualified, and equipped to take action on other than vegetation fires, they maydo so with proper risk assessment and mitigation (Incident Response Pocket Guide, PMS 461. Public Emergency Medical Response Public emergency medical response isnot a functional responsibility of wildland fire resources and should notbe part ofa preplanned response that requires these duties. When wildland firefighters encounter emergency medical response situations, their efforts should be limited to immediate care (e.g., first aid, first responder) actions that they are trained and qualified to perform. • NPS – NPS employees who provide emergency medical services will adhere tothe requirements contained in Director’s Order and Reference Manual #51, Emergency Medical Services. Post-Wildfire Activities Each wildland fire management agency is responsible for taking prompt action to determine the need for, andto prescribe and implement, emergency treatments to minimize threats to life or property orto stabilize and prevent unacceptable degradation to natural and cultural resources resulting from the effects ofa fire onthe lands they manage. Post-wildfire activities references canbe found in: • DOI – ○ Interagency Burned Area Emergency Response Guidebook – Interpretation of Department ofthe Interior 620DM 7 ○ Interagency Burned Area Rehabilitation Guidebook – Interpretation of Department ofthe Interior 620DM 7 • FS – USDA Forest Service Manual 2523, Burned Area Emergency Response (BAER) Suppression Repair Planned actions taken to repair the damages to resources, lands, and facilities resulting from wildfire suppression actions and documented inthe Suppression Repair Plan. These actions are usually implemented prior to, or immediately after containment ofthe wildfire bythe incident management organization. Repairs under this activity maybe completed to return the value topre-wildfire management activity condition as practical but may not improve the condition beyond what was existing prior tothe incident. Emergency Stabilization Planned actions to stabilize and prevent unacceptable degradation to natural and cultural resources, to minimize threats to life or property resulting from the effects ofa wildfire, orto repair/replace/construct physical improvements necessary to prevent degradation of land or resources. Emergency stabilization actions must be taken per agency policy. • DOI – Within 1 year plus 21 days after the ignition date ofa wildfire and documented ina Burned Area Response Plan oran agency specific plan. The bureau director may approve an extension beyond the1 year plus 21 days to accommodate circumstances related to climatic conditions or other significant events. • FS – No later than 1 year after the containment ofthe fire as documented inthe Burned Area Response Funding Request and Authorization.
Rehabilitation Efforts taken to repair or improve wildfire-damaged lands unlikely to recover naturally to management-approved conditions orto repair/replace minor assets damaged by wildfire. Rehabilitation actions must be taken per agency policy. • DOI – Within 5 years following 21 days after the ignition date ofa wildfire as documented ina separate Burned Area Rehabilitation Plan (BAR) orin combination with Burned Area Emergency Response Plan (BAER). • FS – No later than 3 years after the containment ofthe fire as documented inthe Burned Area Rehabilitation Funding Request and Authorization. Restoration Continuing the rehabilitation beyond agency rehabilitation timeframes orthe repair or replacement of major assets damaged bythe wildfire. Post-Wildfire Activities Suppression Repair Emergency Stabilization Rehabilitation Restoration Objective Repair suppression damages Protect life and property Repair damages Long-term ecosystem restoration Damage dueto Suppression activities Post-wildfire events and fire Fire Fire Urgency Immediately after containment 1-12 months 1-5 years (DOI) 1-3 years (FS) 5+ years (DOI) 3+ years (FS) Responsibility IC/agency administrator local unit line officer local unit line officer local unit line officer Funding type Suppression (fire) Suppression (emergency stabilization) Rehabilitation or regular program Regular program Emergency Stabilization Approval Authorities Level BIA BLM FWS NPS FS Local Approval Level <$250,000 Agency superintendent $0 Field/ district manager $0 Refuge manager $0 Park superintendent $0 District ranger $0 Forest supervisor Regional/ State Approval Level $250,000-$500,000 Regional director <$100,000 State director <$500,000 Assistant Regional Director, Refuges with regional fire management coordinator concurrence <$500,000 Regional director $500,000 Western regional foresters $100,000 Eastern and Alaska Regional Foresters National Approval Level >$500,000 Director of Fire Management >$100,000 Director >$500,000 Chief, Branch of Fire Management >$500,000 Chief, Division of Fire and Aviation >$100,000or $500,000 Director, Field Services and Innovation Center Burned Area Emergency Response Teams Incident BAER teams area group of fireline-qualified technical specialists (e.g., hydrologists, biologists, soil scientists) that analyze post-fire conditions and develop the Emergency Stabilization and Rehabilitation (DOI) or Burned Area Emergency Response (FS) funding requests. These teams will meet the requirements for unescorted personnel found in chapter 7 under “Visitors tothe Fireline” when working within the perimeter ofan uncontrolled wildfire. The team’s size and skills should be commensurate with the size and complexity ofthe wildfire. The local unit line officer is responsible for submitting the funding request tothe regional or state office for review and approval within the timeframes established by each agency. Coordination should occur with the regional BAER coordinator during the assessment process. If needed, extensions canbe negotiated with those having the appropriate level of approval authority. • DOI – The Department ofthe Interior maintains a roster of national BAER team personnel to assist field units in planning for complex post-fire emergency stabilization. The national BAER team is scalable in long and
short configurations. BAER teams maybe ordered as command and general staff or ordered as individual resources. • DOI – The DOI national BAER team resources should be requested within 21 days from the discovery date ofthe fire and ordered asper the National Interagency Standards for Resource Mobilization. • FS – The local Forest or Grassland Supervisor designates a unit BAER Coordinator and qualified BAER personnel prior to fire season. National and regional BAER coordinators maintain a roster of experienced BAER personnel available for assignments. When needed, specific BAER personnel from other units canbe requested through the national and regional BAER Coordinators. Once team members have been assigned, they should be ordered tothe specific BAER incident by name request through dispatch. See FSM 2523 for agency- specific policy and direction for BAER teams. Interagency Final Fire Reports and Datasets The final fire report, also referred toas the individual fire report, serves asthe official record fora wildfire occurrence and its related outcomes. While there are other types of fire reports, including the ICS-209 and other situational (e.g. daily) andad-hoc reports, datasets compiled from individual final fire reports provide the official statistics for every agency and the interagency wildland fire management organization asa whole. These datasets also provide vital information regarding the frequency, location, and size of historical fires, which are used for decision support, budget formulation, occurrence modeling, research, analysis, and other planning applications. For these reasons, final fire reports must be completed promptly and accurately once a wildfire is declared “out” and its outcomes are known. To ensure that the wildfire occurrence and workload is fully represented, every wildfire, regardless of size, should be documented with a final fire report. InFORM isa suite of applications used by multiple fire management agencies for final fire reporting. By replacing multiple agency-specific fire reporting applications, InFORM strives to fulfill the goal of having “one fire, one report, one authoritative data source.” A single corresponding record must exist inthe InFORM dataset for any wildfire that originates onor otherwise burns onto federally owned or protected lands. Because the Federal wildland fire management agencies use IRWIN-integrated, computer-aided dispatch (CAD) applications and issue FireCodes for wildfires, most records will be automatically established in InFORM, where they will be available for review, editing, and certifying once the fire is declared “out” and reporting ceases in other applications. • The Federal wildland fire management agency with jurisdiction ata fire’s point of origin is responsible for ensuring that the fire is reported and certified in InFORM; however, this responsibility canbe conveyed to another agency via agreement. Certification isa process in InFORM whereby the final fire report is declared complete and suitable for use in official statistics. ○ BLM/NPS/USFS/BIA/BOR – Final fire reports for wildfires that originate on agency lands, or lands formally protected by these agencies, shall be certified in InFORM. ○ FWS – For wildfires that originate onFWS lands, or lands formally protected byFWS, final fire reports shall be submitted via InFORM as noted in chapter 4. ○ Other agencies – Several State agencies and certain other Federal agencies, such as those under Department of Defense, have lands where wildfires occur, butdo not use InFORM for fire reporting. • Fora fire that originates on land that is under the jurisdiction ofan agency that does not use InFORM, but subsequently burns onto lands owned or protected byone or more Federal agency that does use InFORM for reporting, any one of these affected Federal agencies shall ensure that the fire is reported and certified in InFORM. For more information about interagency fire reporting and InFORM, goto the NWCG Fire Reporting Subcommittee webpage. Incident Business Management Specific incident business management guidance is contained inthe NWCG Standards for Interagency Incident Business Management, PMS 902. This handbook assists participating agencies ofthe NWCG to constructively work together to provide effective execution of each agency's incident management program by establishing procedures for: • Uniform application of regulations onthe useof human resources, including classification, payroll, commissary, injury compensation, and travel; • Acquisition of necessary equipment and supplies from appropriate sources in accordance with applicable procurement regulations; • Managing and tracking Government property; • Financial coordination with the protection agency and maintenance of finance, property, procurement, and personnel records and forms;
• Use and coordination of incident business management functions as they relate to sharing of resources among Federal, State, and local agencies, including the military; • Investigation and reporting of accidents; • Investigating, documenting, and reporting claims; • Documenting costs and implementing cost-effective criteria for managing incident resources; and • Non-fire incidents administrative processes. ○ DOI – The Department ofthe Interior All Hazards-Supplement tothe NWCG Standards for Interagency Incident Business Management establishes business management guidelines for the Department ofthe Interior’s (DOI) all ‐ hazards incidents. The DOI Supplement is under review. Cost Management An incident business advisor (INBA) must be assigned toany wildfire with costs of $5 million or more. Ifa qualified INBA isnot available, the approving official will appoint a financial advisor to monitor expenditures. Incident cost objectives will be included asa performance measure inIMT evaluations. Fire Reviews – Wildland Fire Management Annual Report and Large Fire Review (FS) See chapter 18. Significant Wildland Fire Review (DOI) See chapter 18. Cache Management Agencies often serve as interagency partners in national support caches and local area support caches and may operate single agency initial attack caches. All caches will maintain established stocking levels, receive and process orders from participating agencies and follow ordering and fire replenishment procedures as outlined bythe national and geographic area cache management plans and mobilization guides. • FS – Refer toFSM 5160 for specific requirements. Type 1and 2 National Interagency Support Caches There are fifteen national interagency support caches (NISC); eleven are managed bythe Forest Service, three are managed bythe BLM, and one is managed bythe State of Idaho. The fifteen national caches are part ofthe National Fire Equipment System (NFES). Each of these caches provides incident support inthe form of equipment and supplies to units within their respective geographic areas. The NFES cache system may support other emergency, disaster, fire-related or land management activities, provided that such support is permitted by agency policies and does not adversely affect the primary mission. These national caches donot provide supplies and equipment to restock local caches for non-incident requests. Non-emergency (routine) orders should be directed tothe source of supply, e.g., Defense Logistics Agency (DLA) or private vendors. The Great Basin Area Incident Support Cache at NIFC provides publications management support tothe National Wildfire Coordinating Group (NWCG). Reference the NWCG NFES Catalog Part 2: Publications, PMS 449-2, for more detailed information. Forest Service National Symbols Program distribution is through the Eastern Area Incident Support Cache (NEK). This material is coordinated bythe USDA Forest Service, under advisement ofthe National Association of State Foresters (NASF) Cooperative Forest Fire Prevention Committee (CFFP). Materials include Smokey Bear/Junior Forest Ranger prevention items and Woodsy Owl environmental educational materials. NEK also distributes DOI fire education materials. The website (https://www.fs.usda.gov/main/conservationeducation/about/education-themes/wildland-fire) contains the catalog of materials, information about these programs, and online ordering instructions. Type 3 Support Caches These caches directly support more than one agency and generally cover more than one administrative unit. Type 3 support caches will maintain stocking levels to meet the identified needs ofthe multiple agencies for whom service is provided. Type 4 Local Caches Numerous type 4 local caches are maintained by each agency. These caches will establish and maintain stocking levels to meet the initial response needs ofthe local unit(s).
Inventory Management System Implementation Each fire cache, regardless of size, should initiate and maintain a cache inventory management system. Agency management systems provide a check out/return concept that incorporates a debit/crediting for all items leaving the cache. This system is strictly followed inthe type 1and 2 NISCs. Inventory management processes should be implemented for all type 3 support and type 4 local caches. Accountability Fire loss/use rate is defined asall property and supplies lost, damaged, or consumed onan incident. Fire/loss use rates are reported asa percentage that is calculated in dollars of items issued compared to items returned. Consumable items are not included in this total. All items stocked in agency fire caches will be categorized for return (loss tolerance/use rate) and accountability purposes. Trackable Items Trackable items include items that a cache may track dueto dollar value, sensitive property classification, or limited quantities. Available items that are considered trackable are usually engraved or tagged with a cache trackable identification number. These items must be returned tothe issuing cache atthe endof the incident use, or documentation must be provided tothe issuing cache asto whyit was not returned. All trackable items are also considered durable. Accountability for trackable items is expected tobe 100 percent. Durable Items Durable items include cache items considered to have a useful life expectancy greater than one incident. High percentages of return for these items are expected. These items are not specifically cache identified/tagged/engraved. Durable items include water handling accessories, helicopter accessories, tents and camp items such as heaters, lights, lanterns, tables, chairs, hose, tools, backpack pumps, sleeping bags, pads, cots, and personal protective equipment. A90% level of return isthe expected threshold for durable items. Consumable Items Consumable items include items normally expected tobe consumed during incident use. Consumable items returned in unused condition are credited tothe incident. Examples of consumable items are batteries, plastic canteens, cubitainers, forms, MREs, fusees, hot food containers, petroleum products, and medical supplies. Incident Management and Environmental Sustainability Every incident should seek opportunities to reduce unnecessary waste and limit impacts associated with management actions. This canbe accomplished, for example, by implementing “greening fire” sustainability best management practices (e.g., energy and water conservation, alternative energy, sustainable acquisition, and waste prevention and recycling) as long as such efforts donot compromise operational or safety objectives. Tothe degree possible, prioritize the procurement of sustainable products and services whenever lifecycle cost-effective. Incident-to-Incident Transfer of Supplies and Equipment Transfer of supplies and equipment between incidents isnot encouraged, dueto the increased possibility of accountability errors. In instances when itis determined tobe economically feasible and operationally advantageous, the supply unit leader from the incident that is releasing the items will complete the Interagency Incident Waybill (NFES 1472), including: • NFES number • Quantity • Unit of issue • Description • Trackable ID number, if item is trackable • Receiving incident name, incident number, and resource request number The supply unit leader will send the waybill transfer information tothe servicing NISC to maintain proper accountability recording. Upon request, the servicing NISC can provide the supply unit leader with an Outstanding Items Report or Incident Summary Report to facilitate accurate waybill documentation. Fire Loss Tolerance Reporting for Type 1and 2 Complexity Incidents In order to help managers keep incident-related equipment and supply loss toa minimum, IMTs are required to maintain accountability and tracking of these items. Guidelines and procedures to assist with this accountability are provided in chapter 30of the NWCG Standards for Interagency Incident Business Management. To further facilitate these procedures and provide oversight, a fire loss report has been developed that provides detailed information
regarding used and trackable item use. This report has been accepted by NWCG for all wildland fire agencies and will be compiled for all type 1and type 2 complexity incidents. Investigations maybe conducted in those cases where thresholds may have been exceeded. These reports are compiled bythe NISC servicing the incident. Reports will then be forwarded tothe responsible local office, with a copy tothe state/regional FMO. The following steps must be followed to ensure accurate reports: • Atthe close of each incident, all property must be returned tothe servicing NFES cache; • If accountable/trackable property has been destroyed or lost, appropriate documentation must be provided tothe cache for replacement and updating property records; • All property purchased with emergency fire funds foran incident must be returned tothe NFES cache system; • All unused consumable and/or durable NFES items must be returned tothe servicing NFES cache within 30 days of control ofthe incident; and • Agency administrators/FMOs must review the fire loss report and recommend appropriate follow-up action if losses are excessive. Those actions and recommendations should be documented and filed inthe final incident records. Incident Supply and Equipment Return Procedures Supplies and equipment ordered with suppression funds will be returned tothe ordering unit atthe close ofthe incident and dispersed inone of three ways: • Items meeting NFES standards will be returned tothe NISC for reuse within the fire supply system; • Items not meeting the prescribed NFES standards will be purchased with program funds bythe local unit ifthe items are needed for program use; or • Items will be delivered tothe unit’s excess property program for disposal. Cache Returns and Restock Procedures All returns for credit and restock of caches to specific incident charges should be made within 30 days after the close ofthe incident. If that timeframe cannot bemet, returns and restock be made during the same calendar year as items were issued. All returns should be tagged with appropriate incident number, accompanied byan interagency waybill identifying the appropriate incident number, or accompanied by issue documents to ensure proper account credit is given. Any items returned after the calendar year of issue will be returned to multiple-fire charges unless specific incident charge documentation (issues) canbe provided with the return. Incident Replacement of Government Property Refer tothe NWCG Standards for Interagency Incident Business Management, chapter 30, for procedures governing property management relating to incident activities. The agency administrator is responsible for providing agency property management guidelines and/or procedures to incident personnel. Damage or loss for assigned property is addressed under NWCG Standards for Interagency Incident Business Management, chapter 30. Specialty ornon-cache items originally provided bythe home unit through the use of preparedness funds will be replaced by home unit funds ifthe loss isdue to normal wear and tear. Ifthe Government property is damaged onthe incident dueto a specific event (e.g., wind event damages tent), the incident may, upon receipt of required documentation and proof of damage, authorize replacement using the Incident Replacement Requisition (OF-315). Cache items will be replaced atthe incident if available. Cache items that are not available atthe incident maybe authorized for restocking atthe home unit viaan authorized Incident Replacement Requisition (OF-315). For replacement of NFES items not carried bythe NISC responsible for supporting the incident (i.e., Wildland Firefighter’s Pants, type II), replacement must be authorized using the Incident Replacement Requisition (OF-315) and should be accomplished by ordering the item from DLA.
Chapter 12 Suppression Chemicals and Delivery Systems Policy for Use of Fire Chemicals Use only products qualified and approved for intended use. Follow safe handling procedures and use personal protective equipment (PPE) recommended onthe product label and Safety Data Sheets (SDS). A current list of qualified products and approved uses canbe found onthe Wildland Fire Chemical Systems (WFCS) website. Refer to local jurisdictional policy and guidance related touse of wildland fire chemicals for protection of historic structures. Products must be blended or mixed atthe proper ratio prior to being loaded into aircraft. Quality control and safety requirements dictate that mixing or blending of wildland fire chemicals be accomplished by approved methods. The use of fire chemicals mixed with on board fire chemical injection systems or blending systems are not permitted tobe used on federally contracted aircraft on Federal lands. This also includes cooperator aircraft operating on fires on Federal lands. Types of Fire Chemicals Long-Term Retardant Long-term retardants contain fertilizer salts that change the way fuels burn and are effective even after the water has evaporated. Retardants maybe applied aerially by very large, large, and single engine (SEAT) airtankers and helicopter bucket. Some retardant products are approved for fixed-tank helicopters; others are formulated specifically for delivery from ground sources. See the Qualified Products List (QPL) for specific uses for each product. Recommended coverage levels and guidelines for use canbe found inthe Incident Response Pocket Guide (IRPG, PMS 461). Retardant mixing, blending, testing, and sampling requirements canbe found atthe WFCS website Lot Acceptance and Quality Assurance page (https://www.fs.usda.gov/rm/fire/wfcs/). Fire Suppressant Foam Fire suppressant foams are combinations of wetting and foaming agents added to water to improve the effectiveness ofthe water. These foams areno longer effective once the water has evaporated. Foam maybe applied by engines and portable pumps. Aerial application of foam isno longer approved on Federal jurisdictional lands. See the QPL for specific uses for each product. Approved foam concentrate maybe used to improve the efficiency of water, except near waterways where accidental spillage or over spray ofthe chemical could be harmful tothe aquatic ecosystem. Wet Water Using foam concentrates ata mix ratio of0.1 percent will produce awet water solution. Water Enhancer (Gel) Water enhancers, including firefighting gels and elastomers, are added to water to improve drop characteristics and adhesion of water to fuel. Water enhancers are not effective once the water has evaporated. These products maybe used in structure protection within the wildland interface oron wildland fuels. Mixing water enhancers outside of their qualified mix ratios isnot acceptable. Water enhancers are fully approved for use in helicopter buckets and engine application. Some products are approved for use in SEATs and fixed-tank helicopters at specific mix ratios. See the QPL for specific uses for each product. The use of water enhancers mixed with on-board injection systems are not allowed on Federal lands oron federally contracted aircraft. The use of water enhancers mixed through a proportioner and loaded from ground-based equipment is acceptable according to their qualified applications as specified onthe QPL. • BIA – While improvements for normalizing the use ofon-board injection systems continue, BIA will allow the use ofon-board injection, including the field testing of equipment and products bythe National Technology Development Program (NTDP) to include efforts to conduct an Operational Field Evaluation (OFE) which include BIA contracted aircraft. BIA regions are approved to continue with theon-board mixing practice until written notice is received giving other direction of other methods as necessary. This action has been discussed atthe NWCG Fire Chemicals Subcommittee and was widely supported.
Safety Information Personnel Safety All qualified wildland fire chemicals meet minimum requirements (Forest Service Specifications 5100-304, 5100- 306, 5100-307) regarding aquatic and mammalian toxicity (acute oral toxicity, acute dermal toxicity, primary skin irritation, and primary eye irritation). Specifications for long-term retardants, fire suppression foams, and water enhancers canbe found onthe WFCS website. Personnel involved in handling, mixing, and applying fire chemicals or solutions shall be trained in proper procedures to protect their health and safety and the environment. Approved fire chemicals canbe irritating tothe eyes. Personnel must follow the manufacturer’s recommendations; including useof PPE, as found onthe product label and product SDS. The SDSs for all approved fire chemicals canbe found onthe Wildland Fire Chemicals and Aerial Delivery Systems website. Human health risk from accidental drench with fire chemicals canbe mitigated by washing with water to remove any residue from exposed skin. Containers ofany fire chemical, including backpack pumps and engine tanks, should be labeled potable ornon- potable as appropriate. Slippery footing isa hazard at storage areas, unloading and mixing sites, and wherever applied. Because all fire chemical concentrates and solutions contribute to slippery conditions, all spills must be cleaned up immediately, preferably with adry absorbent pador granules. Firefighters should be aware that fire chemicals can conceal ground hazards. Wildland fire chemicals can penetrate and deteriorate leather boots, resulting inwet feet and potentially ruined leather. Aerial Application Safety Personnel and equipment inthe flight path of intended aerial drops should move toa location that will decrease the possibility of being hit with a drop. Personnel near aerial drops should be alert for objects (tree limbs, rocks, etc.) that the drop could dislodge. The IRPG provides additional safety information for personnel in drop areas. During training or briefings, inform all fire personnel of environmental guidelines and requirements for fire chemicals application and avoid contact with waterways. Avoid dipping from rivers or lakes with a helicopter bucket containing residual fire chemicals without first cleaning/washing down the bucket. Consider setting upan adjacent reload site and manage the fire chemicals in portable tanks or terminate the use of chemicals for that application. Interagency Policy for Aerial and Ground Delivery of Wildland Fire Chemicals Near Waterways and Other Avoidance Areas This policy isan expansion and update for the 2000 and 2009 updated Guidelines for Aerial Delivery ofall wildland fire chemicals, including retardant, foam, and water enhancers, which were established and approved bythe Forest Service (FS) and the Department ofthe Interior (DOI). The policy includes additional avoidance areas (both aquatic and terrestrial) for aerial delivery of fire chemicals as designated by individual agencies and includes additional FS reporting requirements. This policy does not require the helicopter or airtanker pilot-in-command tofly in such away asto endanger hisor her aircraft, other aircraft, or structures or compromise ground personnel safety. Aerial Delivery Policy Ground Delivery Policy • Avoid aerial application ofall wildland fire chemicals within 300 feet of waterways. • Additional mapped avoidance areas maybe designated by individual agency. • Whenever practical, as determined bythe fire incident commander (IC), use water or other less toxic wildland fire chemical suppressants for direct attack or less toxic, approved fire retardants in areas occupied by threatened, endangered, proposed, candidate or sensitive species (TEPCS) or their designated critical habitats. • Avoid terrestrial application ofall wildland fire chemicals within 300 feet of waterways.1 1Delivery onthe ground provides for more precise delivery of fire chemicals to target areas. Thus, delivery is allowed within the aquatic mapped avoidance areas provided chemicals donot reach the waterway. Because there isthe potential for TEPCS, their designated critical habitats, or
other resources such as cultural or heritage areas to occur in waterway buffers or additional mapped avoidance areas, consult the proper resource advisor(s) prior to application to determine best action orthe potential for environmental effects. See reporting section below for requirements. Waterway Definition A waterway isany body of water (including lakes, rivers, streams, and ponds) whether ornot it contains aquatic life. Waterway Buffer A waterway buffer isan area that extends 300 feet on either side ofa waterway. Additional Mapped Avoidance Areas OnFS lands, there maybe areas requiring additional protection outside ofthe 300-foot waterway buffer. These areas may include certain dry intermittent or ephemeral streams, areas designated for resource protection, as well as areas for the protection of TEPCS terrestrial habitats and population areas. • FS – Maps are available Interagency Wildland Fire Chemicals Policy and Guidance websites (https://www.fs.usda.gov/managing-land/fire/chemicals). Guidance for Pilots Pilots will avoid all waterways and additional mapped avoidance areas designated by individual agencies. To meet the 300-foot waterway buffer zone or additional mapped avoidance areas guideline, implement the following: • All aircraft: When approaching a waterway or other avoidance areas, the pilot shall terminate application of wildland fire chemical approximately 300 feet before reaching the area. When flying over a waterway, the pilot shall not begin application of wildland fire chemical until 300 feet after crossing the far bank or shore. The pilot shall make adjustments for airspeed and ambient conditions such as wind to avoid the application of wildland fire chemicals within the 300-foot buffer zone. Riparian vegetation maybe an indicator of waterways and pilots should confirm tothe extent possible that no water is present before dropping. • Prior to fire retardant application, all aerial supervision and/or pilots shall be briefed onthe locations ofall TEPCS or other avoidance areas inthe vicinity. • If operationally feasible, pilots orthe aerial supervision shall make a “dry run” over the intended application area and/or coordinate with ground resources to identify avoidance areas and waterways inthe vicinity ofthe wildland fire. • Pilots will be provided avoidance area maps and information atall briefings (ifnot dispatched from one geographic area/unit and delivering to another geographic area). • All pilots will provide GPS location tracks of aerial retardant drops tothe incident management team (IMT) situation unit leader (SITL) and/or geographic information system specialist (GISS). These data will be added tothe National Incident Feature Service (NIFS, https://www.nwcg.gov/publications/pms936/national-incident- feature-services) bythe IMT GISS and made available to fire personnel. Exceptions for Aerial Delivery of Long-Term Retardant on USDA Forest Service Lands (2024 Record of Decision) • Deviations from the policy are allowed in cases where human life or public safety is threatened and retardant use within avoidance areas could be reasonably expected to alleviate that threat. Exceptions for All Other Agencies and All Other Fire Chemicals • When alternative line construction tactics are not available dueto terrain constraints, congested area, life and property concerns, or lack of ground personnel, itis acceptable to anchor the wildland fire chemical application tothe waterway. When anchoring a wildland fire chemical line toa waterway, use the most accurate method of delivery in order to minimize placement of wildland fire chemical inthe waterway (e.g., a helicopter rather than a heavy airtanker). • Deviations from the policy are acceptable when life or property is threatened and the useof wildland fire chemical canbe reasonably expected to alleviate the threat. • When potential damage to natural resources outweighs possible loss of aquatic life, the agency administrator may approve a deviation from these guidelines. Reporting Requirements of Aerially Delivered Wildland Fire Chemicals Into Waterways, Waterway Buffer Areas and Mapped Avoidance Areas During training or briefings, inform field personnel of: • Environmental guidelines for fire chemical application; • Requirements for avoiding contact with waterways; • Additional mapped avoidance areas as designated by individual agency; and • Their responsibility for upward reporting inthe event of application, for whatever reason, into avoidance areas.
If application of wildland fire chemical occurs or anyone believes the application may have been introduced within waterways, waterway buffered areas, or other mapped avoidance areas, the following is required as appropriate: • Inform supervisor; • The information will be forwarded to incident management and the agency administrator, usually through the resource advising group; • The incident or host authorities must immediately contact specialists within the local jurisdiction; and • Notifications and reporting will be completed as soon as possible. Procedures have been implemented for the required reporting. All information, including reporting tools and instructions, are posted onthe Wildland Fire Chemicals and Aerial Delivery Systems and Interagency Wildland Fire Chemicals Policy and Guidance websites. TheFS has additional reporting requirements for threatened, endangered, proposed, candidate andFS-listed sensitive species for aerially delivered fire retardant only. This requirement resulted from the Forest Service’s acceptance of Biological Opinions received from the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS), and the 2024 Record of Decision (ROD) for Nationwide Aerial Application of Fire Retardant on National Forest System Lands. The procedures, reporting tools, and instructions canbe found atthe same websites listed above. Endangered Species Act Emergency Consultation The following provisions are guidance for complying with the emergency section 7 consultation procedures ofthe Endangered Species Act (ESA) for wildland fire chemicals. These provisions donot alter or diminish an action agency’s responsibilities under the ESA. Where threatened and endangered (T&E) species or their habitats are potentially affected by application of wildland fire chemicals, the following additional procedures apply and shall be documented in initial or subsequent fire reports: • As soon as practicable after application of wildland fire chemical near waterways or other avoidance area as designated by agency, determine whether the application has caused any adverse effects toaT&E species or their habitat. This canbe accomplished bythe following: ○ Ground application of wildland fire chemical outside a waterway is presumed to avoid adverse effects to aquatic species andno further consultation for aquatic species is necessary; ○ Aerial application of wildland fire chemical outside 300 feet (orin any additional buffer areas beyond 300 feet established onNFS lands for certain species) ofa waterway is presumed to avoid adverse effects to aquatic species andno further consultation for aquatic species is necessary; ○ Aerial application of wildland fire chemical within 300 feet (orin any additional NFS lands buffer areas) ofa waterway requires that the unit administrator determine whether there have been any adverse effects toT&E species within the waterway. Ifno adverse effects to aquatic T&E species or their habitats, no additional requirement to consult on aquatic species with FWSor NMFS is required; and/or ○ Application of wildland fire chemical within other avoidance areas as designated byan agency requires the agency administrator to determine whether there have been any adverse effects toT&E species. If there areno adverse effects to species or their habitats, there isno additional requirement to consult with FWSor NMFS.  FS – Note: theFS has completed consultation with regulatory agencies (FWS and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration [NOAA]) for aerial delivery of fire retardant (only) on National Forest System lands; please refer tothe Interagency Wildland Fire Chemicals Policy and Guidance website for additional information and reporting, monitoring, andre-initiation of consultation requirements. Aerial delivery of retardant on National Forest System lands should notbe included in emergency consultations. Ifthe action agency determines that there were adverse effects onT&E species or their habitats then the action agency must consult with FWS and NMFS, as required by50 CFR 402.05 (Emergencies). Procedures for emergency consultation are described inthe USFWS Endangered Species Consultation Handbook, chapter 8 (March 1998). Inthe case ofa long-duration incident, emergency consultation should be initiated as soon as practical during the event. Otherwise, post-event consultation is appropriate. The initiation ofthe consultation isthe responsibility ofthe agency administrator. Operational Guidelines for Invasive Species Refer to chapter 11for guidance on minimizing potential transmission of invasive species.
Chapter 13 Firefighter Training and Qualifications Introduction National Wildfire Coordinating Group (NWCG)-sanctioned firefighters are trained and qualified according tothe NWCG and other standards, as outlined below. Standards Firefighters must meet standards identified in NWCG Standards for Wildland Fire Position Qualifications, PMS 310-1. Federal agencies have consolidated minimum standards and information for frequently used positions not included inthe PMS 310-1in the Federal Wildland Fire Qualifications Supplement. Certain firefighters must meet standards identified inthe Interagency Fire Program Management Qualifications Standards and Guide. Agency standards for training and qualifications may exceed the minimum standards established by NWCG. Such additional standards will be approved bythe fire directors and implemented through the Incident Qualifications and Certification System (IQCS). Standards which may exceed the minimum standards established by NWCG are identified in: • BLM – BLM Standards for Fire Training and Workforce Development. • FWS – The Fire Management Handbook. • FS – The Forest Service Fire and Aviation Qualifications Guide (FSFAQG). • BIA – Standards canbe referenced at Division of Wildland Fire Management website. Fire Management Leadership (FML), geographic or national, is required for all BIA agency administrators/line officers, including agency superintendents, agency foresters or natural resource managers, and regional foresters. Regional directors, deputy directors in natural resource program areas, and Tribal natural resource program administrators are also encouraged to attend this course. The national level course offered by NAFRI isthe preferred alternative tothe geographic course. Federal agencies will accept each other’s incident qualifications/certifications. Qualification and Certification Process Each unit with fire management responsibilities will establish an incident qualification card and certification process which may include a qualification and certification committee. In areas cooperating with other Federal, State, or local agencies, an interagency qualification and certification committee should be established and include representatives from each unit. • BIA – Regional/local unit incident qualification card committees will be used to determine qualifications and training requirements. These qualification and certification committees provide management oversight and review ofthe wildland and prescribed fire positions under their jurisdiction. The committee: • Ensures that qualifications generated by IQCS or other agency systems for employees are valid by reviewing the training and experience of each employee. • Determines whether each employee possesses the personal characteristics necessary to perform the wildland and prescribed fire positions ina safe and efficient manner. • Makes recommendations tothe appropriate agency administrator or designee whois responsible for final certification signature. • Develops interagency training needs and sponsors courses that canbe offered locally. • Ensures training nominees meet minimum requirements for attending courses. Recognition of Prior Learning The NWCG Standards for Recognition of Prior Learning, PMS 309, establishes the use ofa formal competency- based qualification process that allows any credentialing authority to recognize and account for competence acquired through life-long learning and experience. RPLis a process that evaluates an individual’s formal and non- formal learning to determine the extent to which that individual has achieved the required competencies to perform effectively ina specific emergency management or responder position. Itis widely recognized that a standardized
RPL process will reduce redundant training, support efforts to increase speed and time to competency, and support efforts to boost national resource surge capacity. • NPS – Current NPS employees will continue to follow the NWCG Standards for Wildland Fire Position Qualifications, PMS 310-1, and defined NWCG qualification processes. The RPL process maybe used for employees newto the NPS who are not transferring from another federal agency using the NWCG Standards for Wildland Fire Position Qualifications (PMS 310-1). • BIA – Recognition of prior learning provides an alternative avenue for future BIA fire personnel to become qualified or nearer to qualified using a defined RPL process. The RPL process is only available for new hires tothe agency, specifically new hires with past military, all hazard and responder experience from another municipality. RPLis not built for existing federal employees. Current federal employees will continue to follow the NWCG Standards for Wildland Fire Positions Qualifications, PMS 310-1, and defined NWCG qualification processes. Submitted RPL packages will be evaluated by representatives from the hiring unit and regional fire staff. Non-NWCG Agency Personnel Qualifications Personnel from non-NWCG agencies meeting PMS 310-1 prerequisites can participate inand receive certificates for successful completion of NWCG courses. Agency employees can complete the task blocks, evaluation record, and verification/certification sections ofa cooperating organization employee’s position task book. Agency employees will not initiate or complete the agency certification sections ofthe position task book for non-agency employees. Personnel from agencies that donot subscribe tothe NWCG qualification standards maybe used on agency managed fires. Agency fire managers must ensure these individuals are only assigned to duties commensurate with their competencies, agency qualifications, and equipment capabilities. Non-NWCG Agency Personnel Useon Prescribed Fire The PMS 310-1 establishes the minimum qualifications for personnel involved in prescribed fires on which resources of more than one agency are utilized—unless local agreements specify otherwise. Incident Qualifications and Certification System The Incident Qualifications and Certification System (IQCS) isthe only approved fire qualifications and certification record keeping system. The Interagency Resource Ordering Capability (IROC) system isnot a record keeping system for qualifications. The Responder Master Record report provided via IQCS meets the agency requirement for maintaining fire qualification records. The system is designed to provide managers atthe local, state/regional, and national levels with detailed qualification, experience, and training information needed to certify employees in wildland fire positions. IQCS isa tool to assist managers in certification decisions; however, it does not replace the manager’s responsibility to validate employees meet all requirements for position performance based on their agency standards. Certifying officials have the option to keep employee qualification records asa hard copy file oran electronic file using the IQCS document upload feature. Both options must include proof ofall required training, certified position task books, required license/certification and documentation for administrative actions (system overrides from certifying officials). Hard copy files will also include current copies ofthe IQCS Responder Master Record and incident qualification card. All records will be stored and/or destroyed in accordance with agency policies. • BLM – Employee training and qualification records will only be stored electronically in IQCS. All records will be stored and/or destroyed in accordance with agency policies. • BLM/NPS – IQCS account managers will have an IQCS delegation of authority from the certifying official. A delegation of authority canbe found onthe IQCS website. • FS – Forest Service Fire and Aviation Qualifications Guide (FSFAQG). • BIA – All BIA/Tribal units with fire management programs are required touse IQCS to track all Federal emergency responders. Agency superintendents and line officers of Tribal fire programs are considered certifying officials pursuant tothe definition inthe PMS 310-1. As such, they are responsible for ensuring that agency fire management personnel develop and maintain fire management job qualifications and meet physical fitness standards in accordance with policy and assign personnel to fire suppression, prescribed fire, wildland fire use activities according to qualifications and demonstrated ability. They are responsible for entering and maintaining employee fire qualifications in IQCS. Certification ofNon-Agency Personnel Non-agency firefighters will be certified by State or local fire departments, or private training providers approved bya memorandum of understanding (MOU) through their local GACC. Agencies will not assist inthe administration or sponsor the work capacity test (WCT) asthe certifying agency.
Incident Qualification Card The agency administrator (or delegate) is responsible for annual certification ofall agency and administratively determined (AD) personnel serving on wildfire, prescribed fire, and all-hazards incidents. This responsibility includes monitoring medical status, fitness, training, performance, and ensuring the responder meets all position performance requirements. Training and successful completion ofthe appropriate WCT must be accomplished and documented. All incident qualification cards issued to agency employees, with the exception of emergency firefighter (EFF-paid or temporary employees atthe FFT2 level), will be printed using IQCS. Incident qualification cards issued toEFF or temporary employees atthe FFT2 level maybe printed without useof IQCS. • BLM/FWS/BIA – An electronic incident qualification card utilizing the IQCS portable document format (PDF) is authorized. • BLM/NPS/FS/BIA – An electronic incident qualification card utilizing the IQCS portable document format (PDF) with electronic signature is authorized. Each agency will designate employees atthe national, regional/state, and local levels as fire qualifications administrators, who ensure all incident experience, incident training, and position task books for employees within the agency are accurately recorded in IQCS. All records must be updated annually or modified as changes occur. • BLM – BLM Recertification Policy: Ifan employee (including an agency-sponsored AD) has lost currency ina position, the employee is converted to trainee status for that position. In order to regain full qualification for the position, the employee must demonstrate the ability to perform inthe position as determined bythe certifying official. Prior to recertification, the employee must: ○ Complete the BLM Recertification Evaluation. ○ Complete oneor more evaluation assignments. ○ Complete any additional requirements as determined bythe certifying official (e.g., additional assignments and/or courses). ○ NOTE: This policy only applies to positions for which a position task book is required. • BLM – State fire management officers (SFMO) will certify position task books and incident qualification cards for area command, and complex command and general staff positions. SFMOs cannot sign their own incident qualification card. • NPS – Certification for area command, complex, and type 1 command and general staff position task books will be done atthe regional office level. Any position task books issued to park FMOs will be certified atthe regional office level. All other position task books maybe certified atthe local unit level. • NPS – The Branch Chief, NPS Branch of Wildland Fire (or delegate) is responsible for the accuracy and certification ofthe regional FMO’s incident qualification card. The regional FMO (or delegate) is responsible for the accuracy and annual certification of their parks’ FMO’s incident qualification cards. • FWS – See Fire Management Handbook for guidance on qualification recertification. • FS – Refer toFSH 5109.17, chapter 10, and the FSFAQG. • BIA – BIA Recertification Policy: Ifan employee, including an agency-sponsored AD, has lost currency ina position, the employee is converted to trainee status for that position. In order to regain full qualification for the position, the employee must demonstrate the ability to perform inthe position as determined bythe certifying official. Prior to recertification, the employee must: ○ Complete oneor more evaluation assignments. ○ Complete any additional requirements as determined bythe certifying official (e.g., additional assignments and/or courses). Incident Qualification Card Expiration Dates Incident qualification cards for responders that possess qualifications requiring work capacity tests (WCT) andRT- 130, Wildland Fire Safety Training Annual Refresher, are valid through the earliest expiration date (either fitness or refresher) listed onthe card. Incident qualification cards for responders that possess qualifications that donot require WCTor RT-130 for issuance are valid for12 months from the date the card is signed bya certifying official. • NPS/FWS – WCTis valid for13-months from the date passed. RT-130is valid for13-months from the date completed. • FS – The WCT is considered effective for13 months from the date passed. Ifan employee ison an emergency assignment onthe date their WCT/refresher expires, they will complete their assignment including any extensions. Upon return to their duty station, they must complete the WCT/refresher and acquire anew incident qualification card prior to accepting any new assignments.
Universal Training Requirements All personnel filling NWCG-recognized positions onthe fireline must have completed: • S-130, Firefighter Training (including the required field exercises); • S-190, Introduction to Wildland Fire Behavior; • L-180, Human Factors onthe Fireline; • ICS-100, Introduction tothe ICS; and • IS-700, An Introduction tothe NIMS (current version). RT-130, Wildland Fire Safety Training Annual Refresher (WFSTAR) RT-130, Wildland Fire Safety Training Annual Refresher (WFSTAR), focuses line-going personnel on fireline operations and decision-making issues in order to recognize and mitigate risk, maintain safe and effective practices, and reduce accidents. Mandatory core components are: • Local Topics – Review and discuss local topics and areas of concern that may impact firefighter safety inthe upcoming fire season. • Incident Reviews and Lessons Learned – Review and discuss lessons learned from past local, regional, and national incident response. • Fire and Aviation Operational Safety – Review and discuss the risk management principles and tools that support safe and effective incident operations. • Human Factors, Communication and Decision Making – Review and discuss the complex interaction between human factors, communication, and decision making. • Fire Shelters and Entrapment Avoidance – Review and discuss fire shelter use, deployment site selection, personal protective equipment (PPE), shelter inspections, and historical entrapment scenarios. Practice proper fire shelter deployment techniques. Core component discussion topics canbe found onthe RT-130 course webpage. The minimum refresher training hour requirement for each agency is identified below. Training time maybe extended in order to effectively complete this curriculum orto meet local training requirements. • BIA – 4 hours. • BLM/NPS/FWS/FS – No minimum hourly requirement; core components must be covered. RT-130is delivered as instructor-led training andis not available as self-directed (online) training. To receive credit for course completion, students must complete a session ofRT-130 with qualified instructors to ensure core components are covered. Delivery options include: • Instructor-led training (ILT) – Delivery will be facilitated byan instructor ina traditional classroom environment. • Virtual instructor-led training (VILT) – Delivery will be facilitated byan instructor ina virtual classroom environment. Minimum requirements forRT-130 instructors have been established inthe NWCG Standards for Course Delivery, PMS 901-1. RT-130 will have a12-month currency. • NPS/FS – Employees have a13-month currency requirement forRT-130. Firefighters who receive initial fire training are not required to take RT-130in the same calendar year. Refresher training content is available onthe RT-130 website. Throughout RT-130, instructors and students should reference the Incident Response Pocket Guide (IRPG, PMS 461/NFES 1077). • BLM – The hands-on fire shelter proficiency drill must be performed, as required by qualification, by each participant in person, not virtually. An individual qualified asa unit instructor (or higher) must monitor the completion ofthe proficiency drill per the NWCG Standards for Course Delivery, PMS 901-1. Medical Examinations Agency administrators and supervisors are responsible for the occupational health and safety of their employees performing wildland fire activities and may require employees to take a medical examination atany time. • BLM/NPS/FWS/BIA – An employee maybe required to take a medical examination whenever there isa reasonable concern, based on objective evidence, about the employee’s continued capacity to meet anyof the
physical or medical requirements ofthe position. Such an examination maybe ordered for instances ofjob- related injuries/illnesses and for those that are not job-related. Supervisors should contact their Servicing Human Resource Office (SHRO) and wildland fire safety program manager for assistance with preparing the memorandum for requiring a medical examination. DOI MSP Program Management (https://www.nifc.gov/medical_standards/) will review the memorandum before issuance tothe employee. • FS – As with DOI agencies, an employee maybe required to take a medical examination whenever there isa reasonable concern, based on objective evidence, about the employee’s continued capacity to meet anyof the physical or medical requirements ofthe position. Such an examination maybe ordered for instances ofjob- related injuries/illnesses and for those that are not job-related. Supervisors should contact the Medical Qualifications Program medical officers for assistance and guidance regarding howto proceed. See the USFS Light and Moderate Medical Process orthe Arduous Medical Process (AMP) Implementation Guide onthe Wildland Firefighter Medical Qualifications found at https://www.fs.usda.gov/managing- land/fire/safety/emedical. Established medical qualification programs, as stated in5 CFR 339, provide consistent medical standards for arduous positions in order to safeguard the health of employees whose work may subject them or others to significant health and safety risks dueto occupational or environmental exposure or demand. Any employee with an active workers’ compensation (OWCP) case or other physical or medical limiting factors/restrictions that preclude them from fully performing the activities ofan arduous position must disclose this as part ofthe self-certification or medical examination process. Information onany medical records is considered confidential and must be kept inthe employee’s medical file. Arduous Fitness Level – Department ofthe Interior Wildland Firefighter Medical Standards Program (DOI MSP) Per Office of Wildland Fire (OWF) Policy Memorandum 2016-014, “All employees (incumbents and applicants) must take an examination meeting Federal Interagency Wildland Fire Medical Standards every three years regardless of employment status and hiring authority, including emergency firefighters (administratively determined – AD/casual hires) and collateral duty firefighters who participate in arduous duty wildland fire activities. An examination taken and successfully cleared in accordance with the DOI MSP direction is required prior to participating inthe Arduous Duty Work Capacity Test (Pack Test), performing arduous duty, wildland fire duties, orany agency sanctioned physical fitness training to prepare for these duties. Inthe years between the periodic examinations, an employee will self-certify their medical concerns and risk in taking the Work Capacity Test.” Refer tothe DOI MSP website or agency wildland fire safety program managers for more information. • FS – All positions which require an arduous qualification must participate ina medical clearance process through the Medical Qualifications Program (MQP). This policy does not apply to cooperating agency wildland firefighters or contractors. Personnel must receive a version ofthe “Medically Qualified” determination from the MQP staff before participating inthe arduous WCTor performing the duties ofa firefighter. Refer to current agency direction at https://www.fs.usda.gov/managing-land/fire/safety/emedical. Additional testing or medical follow-up required to change aDOI MSP determination shall beat the individual's expense unless the agency has granted prior approval. Employees seeking arduous incident qualification card qualifications who work for programs operating under their own medical standards must either participate inthe DOI MSP ormay have their examination meeting all DOI MSP requirements reviewed against the Federal Interagency Wildland Firefighter Medical Standards. Examination/Self-Certification Periodicity and Changes in Medical Status A baseline or periodic examination is required every 36 months from the date ofthe examination regardless ofthe qualification date. Qualification certificates are valid for one year from date of exam or self-certification. Employees may take the work capacity test atany point in that year as long asthe certificate is current. Ifa DOI arduous duty wildland firefighter (WLFF) develops a significant change in medical status between medical exams or self-certifications, the WLFF is required to immediately report this change tohis/her supervisor and complete a self-certification. A significant change in medical status is defined asany injury or illness, including an active workers’ compensation (OWCP) claim, which may prevent performance of arduous duty. • FS – See Change in Medical Status inthe AMP Implementation Guide for more specific information (https://www.fs.usda.gov/managing-land/fire/safety/emedical). Employees must report significant changes in medical status and cease arduous duty until cleared. Eligibility for compensation or benefit claims maybe affected bya failure to report. Ifa change in medical status for arduous duty firefighters has been reported, the supervisor must ensure the firefighter ceases to perform arduous duty andif
necessary, ensure all arduous-duty-related qualifications are prevented from being sent to IROC in IQCS until the employee has been medically cleared to resume arduous duty work. WLFFs must also immediately inform their supervisor if they have not completed an examination within the previous 36 months and must not resume arduous duty work until completion ofa periodic examination and medical qualification. • BLM – Ifa law enforcement officer seeks an arduous wildland firefighter qualification, an additional medical clearance for wildland firefighting must be requested. Ifa determination of “not qualified” is made, the DOI MSP risk mitigation/waiver process will be used. Both actions will be initiated bythe Law Enforcement Medical Standards Officer. • NPS – Ifa law enforcement ranger is also assigned arduous wildland firefighter duties an additional medical clearance for wildland firefighting must be requested atthe time ofher/his law enforcement medical examination. Ifa determination of “not cleared” is made, the DOI MSP risk mitigation/waiver process will be used. • FS – Refer to current agency direction at https://www.fs.usda.gov/managing-land/fire/safety/emedical. Medical Examination Process for Light and Moderate Fitness Levels The medical screening process for light and moderate work capacity testing (Health Screening Questionnaire [HSQ]) is centralized and automated through the DOI MSP’s national contractor. For details onthe process visit https://www.doi.gov/wildlandfire/medical-standards. • FWS/BIA – Law enforcement personnel must complete the light or moderate health screening process through the DOI MSP contractor and provide clearance certificate tothe WCT administrator. • FS – Refer tothe Light and Moderate Medical Process Guide (https://www.fs.usda.gov/managing- land/fire/safety/emedical). Additional specialized testing other than the tests listed onthe OF-178 will notbe covered bythe Forest Service. Ifthe SHRO orFMO hasa direct concern about an employee’s/applicant’s capacity to meet the physical or medical requirements ofa position, the agency may require the employee/applicant to report fora specific medical evaluation. For more information, contact your SHRO or agency wildland fire safety program manager. • BLM – Law enforcement officers must be found medically qualified, or qualified with waiver, and pass the Law Enforcement Physical Efficiency Battery test to have the law enforcement physical fitness standards be equivalent tothe “Moderate” and “Light” work category. • NPS – The law enforcement medical examination for NPS rangers, who are collateral-duty WLFFs, will suffice for moderate and light fitness level clearance. • FS – Refer tothe Light and Moderate Medical Process Guide (https://www.fs.usda.gov/managing- land/fire/safety/emedical). • BIA – Individuals who opt outof the DOI MSPat the arduous level having received a "not-qualified-for- arduous-duty" status during a periodic or baseline examination maybe required to report fora specific medical evaluation to determine fit-for-duty status. Work Capacity Tests Physical Fitness Levels The NWCG Standards for Wildland Fire Position Qualifications, PMS 310-1, identifies fitness levels for specific positions. There are three fitness levels—arduous, moderate, and light—which require an individual to demonstrate their ability to perform the fitness requirements ofthe position. Positions inthe “no fitness level required” category are normally performed ina controlled environment, such asan incident base. • Arduous – Duties involve field work requiring physical performance with above average endurance and superior conditioning. These duties may include an occasional demand for extraordinarily strenuous activities in emergencies under adverse environmental conditions and over extended periods of time. Requirements include running, walking, climbing, jumping, twisting, bending, and lifting more than 50 pounds; the pace ofthe work typically isset bythe emergency conditions. ○ BLM – Law enforcement officers must obtain and present a Wildland Firefighter Determination certificate before participating inthe Arduous WCT. • Moderate – Duties involve field work requiring complete control ofall physical faculties and may include considerable walking over irregular ground, standing for long periods of time, lifting 25to 50 pounds, climbing, bending, stooping, twisting, and reaching. Occasional demands maybe required for moderately strenuous activities in emergencies over long periods of time. Individuals usually set their own work pace. ○ BLM – Law enforcement physical fitness standards are acceptable as equivalent toa “Moderate” WCT work category.
• Light – Duties mainly involve office type work with occasional field activity characterized by light physical exertion requiring basic good health. Activities may include climbing stairs, standing, operating a vehicle, and long hours of work, as well as some bending, stooping, or light lifting. Individuals can usually govern the extent and pace of their physical activity. ○ BLM – Law enforcement physical fitness standard is accepted as equivalent toa “light” WCT work category. Work Capacity Tests WCT Type Distance Weight Time Arduous Pack Test 3 miles 45lb. 45min Moderate Field Test 2 miles 25lb. 30min Light Walk Test 1 mile None 16min Work Capacity Test Administration The work capacity test (WCT) isthe official method of assessing wildland firefighter fitness levels. General guidelines canbe found inthe NWCG Work Capacity Test Administrator’s Guide, PMS 307. • FS – ForFS direction onWCT administration, refer tothe USFS WCT Implementation Guide. WCT administrators must confirm medical clearance atthe appropriate fitness level through review ofa clearance list provided bythe FMO (or delegate) orby verifying certificate ofWCT clearance atthe time ofthe WCT. There isno need for the WCT administrator to collect or retain copies ofthe certificate of clearance. Ata minimum, WCTs are administered annually toall employees, including Administratively Determined (AD) and emergency firefighters (EFF) who will be serving in wildland fire positions that require a fitness level. The currency for the WCTis 12 months. • NPS/FWS/FS – Currency for WCT is13 months. WCT results shall be documented and may capture information covered under the Privacy Act and should be maintained in accordance with agency Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) guidelines. See the NWCG Work Capacity Test Administrator’s Guide, PMS 307, fora Sample Work Capacity Test (WCT) Data Sheet. Administration ofthe WCT for non-Federal firefighters is prohibited for liability reasons. Potential emergency firefighters who would be hired under emergency-hire authority bythe agency must bein ADpay status or sign an agency-specific volunteer services agreement prior to taking the WCT. Federal employees may participate ina WCT administered bynon-Federal partners if approved bythe FMO and all requirements of this chapter are met. • FS – AFS employee may participate inany federal WCT that follows federal guidance within the Red Book. AFS employee may not take aWCT administered bya non-federal partner. Ajob hazard analysis (JHA) or risk assessment (RA) shall be developed and approved for each field unit prior to administrating the WCT. Administer the test using the JHA/RAas a briefing guide. • BLM – AnRA shall be developed and approved for each field unit prior to administering the WCT. • BIA – AnRA shall be developed and approved for each field unit prior to administering the WCT. AnRA for the WCT can be found at https://www.bia.gov/bia/ots/dfwfm/bwfm/safety/risk-assessments. The local unit shall prepare a medical response plan (such asan ICS-206 form), evaluate options for immediate medical care and patient transport, and identify closest emergency medical services. A minimum ofa qualified medical first responder/emergency medical responder (EMR) must beon site during WCT administration. Based upon a thorough evaluation of potential medical treatment and evacuation scenarios, a higher level of onsite emergency medical qualifications and equipment maybe warranted (e.g., emergency medical technician (EMT) or paramedic). An automatic external defibrillator (AED) is required onsite during all WCTs. Personnel taking the WCT will only complete the level of testing (pack, field, walk) required bythe highest fitness level identified fora position on their incident qualification card. Employees shall not take the WCT unless they have an incident qualification card qualification that requires itand only atthe fitness level required by that position as identified inthe PMS 310-1or agency-specific guidance or policy. Treadmills are not approved for work capacity testing. WCT results must be entered into IQCS annually to update the fitness level and date that will appear onthe incident qualification card. WCT dates entered in IQCS will reflect the date the employee passed the fitness test. The results
ofthe most recent WCT will always supersede the results ofany previous WCT, even if previous WCTs were within the currency period. • NPS – Law enforcement officers are required to provide medical clearance documentation to their FMO prior to participating ina work capacity test. The law enforcement examination is sufficient for the light and moderate level work capacity testing. Ifa law enforcement ranger is also assigned arduous wildland firefighter duties, an additional medical clearance for wildland firefighting must be requested atthe time ofher/his law enforcement medical examination. • FS – Failed ornot completed WCT attempts areto be entered into the eMedical system bythe HSQ coordinator. Work Capacity Test – Retesting Employees whodo not pass the WCT will be provided another opportunity to retest but must wait at least 48 hours before retaking the WCT. Ifan employee sustains an injury (verified bya licensed medical provider) during a test, the test will not count asan attempt. Once an injured employee has been released for full duty, the employee will be given time (notto exceed 4 weeks) to prepare for the test. The numbers of retesting opportunities that will be allowed include: • Three opportunities total for permanent employees required to pass a test for duties inthe fire program. • One opportunity for temporary employees required to pass a test (a second chance maybe provided atthe discretion of fire management). ○ FS – Direction canbe found inthe NWCG Work Capacity Test (WCT) Administrator’s Guide, PMS 307. ○ BIA – Employees who fail two WCTs will develop an appropriate physical fitness plan with their supervisors to ensure accountability before the third test is administered. ○ BIA – Temporary employees: A second test maybe authorized bythe local unit after 14 days to allow the individual to train for the WCT. A failed second test will result ina 90-day suspension without additional testing during that period. Physical Fitness and Conditioning Agency administrators are responsible for ensuring the overall physical fitness of firefighters. Employees serving in wildland fire positions that require a fitness rating of arduous asa condition of employment are authorized one hour of duty time each workday for physical fitness conditioning. Employees serving in positions that require a fitness rating of moderate or light maybe authorized upto three hours per week. • BLM – See chapter 2for physical fitness conditioning requirements. Fitness conditioning periods maybe identified and structured to include aerobic and muscular exercises. Team sports are not authorized for fitness conditioning. Chapters 5, 6, 7, 8, and9 and appendices F, G, andH of Fitness and Work Capacity 2009 ed. (PMS 304-2, NFES 1596) and the Interagency Fire Fitness Program inthe USFS WCT Implementation Guide provide excellent guidance concerning training specifically for the pack test, aerobic fitness programs, and muscular fitness training. • NPS – Refer toDO 57B (PM14-03 Employee Fitness – Interim Policy, and Reference Manual Occupational Health and Fitness). • FWS – Refer to chapter 4, Physical Fitness and Conditioning. • FS – Forest Service direction is found inFSH 5109.17and the FSFAQG. NFFE Partnership Bargaining Unit employees may only be required to successfully complete the WCT once per year. • BIA – Refer to chapter 6, Physical Fitness and Conditioning. Minimum Age Requirements for Hazardous Duty Assignments on Federal Incidents Persons under 18 years old will not perform hazardous duties during wildland fire management operations on Federal jurisdictions. Engine Modules Staffing levels and specific requirements for engine personnel maybe found in chapter 14, Firefighting Equipment. Helicopter Modules Staffing levels and specific requirements for helicopter personnel maybe found in chapter 16, Aviation. Smokejumpers Smokejumpers (SMKJ) provide professional and effective fire suppression, fuels reduction, and fire management services to help land managers meet objectives.
Smokejumper Policy Smokejumper operations are guided by direction inthe interagency section ofthe Standards for Smokejumper Operations. Each base will comply with smokejumper operations standards. The arduous duties, specialized assignments, and operations ina variety of geographic areas require smokejumpers to have uniform training, agency-approved equipment, communications, organization, and operating procedures. Smokejumper Communications All smokejumpers carry programmable radios and are proficient in their use and programming procedures. Smokejumper Training To ensure proficiency and safety, smokejumpers complete annual training that covers aspects of aviation, parachuting, fire suppression tactics, administrative procedures, and safety related tothe smokejumper mission and fire operations. The training program for first-year smokejumpers is four weeks long. Candidates are evaluated to determine: • Level of physical fitness; • Ability to learn and perform smokejumper skills; • Ability to work asa team member; • Attitude; and • Ability to think clearly and remain productive ina stressful environment. Smokejumper Target Qualifications Position IQCS Target Smokejumper Training Target Department managers Complex command and general staff Spotter Incident commander (IC), type 3 (ICT3); division supervisor (DIVS); air tactical group supervisor (ATGS), prescribed fire burn boss, type 2 (RXB2); safety officer type 3 (SOF3) Lead smokejumper Strike team leader (STL), task force leader (TFLD) Senior rigger, field observer (FOBS) Smokejumper IC, type 4 (ICT4); crew boss, single resource (CRWB); firing boss (FIRB) Firing effects monitor (FEMO) Rookie smokejumper IC, type 5 (ICT5); firefighter, type 1 (FFT1) Smokejumper Medical Standards Smokejumper medical standards are the same asthe Federal Interagency Wildland Firefighter Medical Standards – Arduous Duty Wildland Firefighter. USFS Smokejumper Physical Fitness Standards The national minimum standards for smokejumpers are: • 1.5 mile runin 11:00 minutes or less; • 45sit-ups; • 25 push-ups; • 7 pull-ups; • 110lb. pack-out over 3 miles/level terrain/90 minutes*; and • Successful completion ofthe WCTat the arduous level. *This element is tested during smokejumper rookie training. ○ BLM – Refer to chapter 2for physical fitness standards. Interagency Hotshot Crews Interagency hotshot crews (IHC) provide an organized, mobile, and skilled hand crew for all phases of wildfire suppression. IHCs are comprised of18-25 firefighters and are used primarily for wildfire suppression, fuels reduction, and other fire management duties. IHCs are capable of performing self-contained, initial attack suppression operations and commonly provide incident management capability atthe type 3or 4 complexity level.
Interagency Hotshot Crew Policy IHC standards provide consistent planning, funding, organization, and management ofthe agency IHCs. The sponsoring unit will ensure compliance with the established standards. The arduous duties, specialized assignments, and operations ina variety of geographic areas required of IHCs dictate that training, equipment, communications, transportation, organization, and operating procedures are consistent for all agency IHCs. Asper agency policy, all IHCs will be managed under the Standards for Interagency Hotshot Crew Operations (SIHCO). • BLM/NPS – BLM Preparedness Review Checklist #16 (Interagency Hotshot Crew) supersedes the checklist found inthe SIHCO. • BLM – Additional guidance for BLM IHCs is contained in chapter 2. Interagency Hotshot Crew Certification The process for IHC certification is found inthe Standards for Interagency Hotshot Crew Operations (SIHCO). Annual Interagency Hotshot Crew Premobilization Process The superintendent of crews holding IHC status the previous season are required to complete the Annual IHC Mobilization Checklist (SIHCO, appendix C) and send the completed document tothe local Geographic Area Coordination Center (GACC) prior to making the crew available for assignment each season. Annual Interagency Hotshot Crew Readiness Review Onan annual basis the superintendent of crews holding IHC status the previous season are required to complete the Annual IHC Preparedness Review (SIHCO, appendix B). This process is designed to evaluate crew preparedness and compliance with SIHCO. The annual review will be conducted while the crew is fully staffed and operational. The review isnot required prior toa crew being made available for incident assignment atthe beginning of their availability period. When a review document is completed, the document is kept on file atthe local (host) unit fire management office. Interagency Hotshot Crew Organization Individual crew structure will be based on local needs using the following standard positions: superintendent, assistant superintendent, squad leader, skilled firefighter, and crewmember. • BLM – IHCs have the option of traveling with 25 personnel when on incident assignments. • NPS – IHCs have the option of traveling with 25 personnel when on incident assignments as authorized bythe sending or receiving unit. • FS – IHCs may staff and mobilize with 25 personnel for incident assignments. When traveling by charter aircraft, IHCs should be prepared to take no more than 20 personnel unless they receive approval via normal dispatch channels. Interagency Hotshot Crew Availability Periods IHCs will have minimum availability periods as defined inthe SIHCO. Availability periods may exceed the required minimum availability period. The crew superintendent will inform the local supervisor and the GACC ofany changes inthe crew's availability. National Interagency Hotshot Crew Status Reporting System IHCs will report status through the National IHC Status Reporting System. IHC superintendents will regularly update the system with any change in crew status and/or current utilization when on assignment. IHCs may report status by three methods: • Viae-mail to BLM_FC_Crews@blm.gov (preferred method); • Via the internet tothe Hotshot Status submission form (link available from the “Crew” page ofthe NICC website); or • Contacting the NICC Crew Desk at208-387-5400. Interagency Hotshot Crew Communications IHCs will provide a minimum of eight programmable multi-channel radios per crew as stated inthe SIHCO. Interagency Hotshot Crew Transportation Crews will be provided adequate transportation. The number of vehicles used to transport a crew should not exceed five. All vehicles must adhere tothe certified maximum gross vehicle weight (GVW) limitations.
Other Hand Crews Policy All crews must meet minimum crew standards as defined below as well asany additional agency, State, or contractual requirements. Crew typing (https://www.nwcg.gov/publications/pms200/crews-pms-200) will be identified atthe local level with notification made tothe local GACC. Crew Standards for National Mobilization Minimum Standards Type 1 Type 2 with Initial Attack Capability Type 2 Fire Suppression Module1 Fireline Capability Initial attack: Canbe broken up into squads, fireline construction, complex firing operations (backfire) Initial attack: Canbe broken up into squads, fireline construction Initial attack: Fireline construction Capable of performing self-contained initial attack suppression operations and incident management capability atthe type 5 complexity level Crew Size 18-2518-2018-205-17 Leadership Qualifications Permanent Supervision Superintendent: TFLD, ICT4, FIRB Assistant superintendent: strike team leader, crew (STCR) or TFLD and CRWB; ICT4 3 squad leaders: CRWB and ICT5 2 senior firefighters: FFT1 Crew boss: CRWB 3 squad leader: ICT5 Crew boss: CRWB 3 squad leader: FFT1 1 single resource boss (SRB)/ ICT5 2 FFT1; commensurate with span of control Language Requirement All senior leadership including squad leaders and higher must be able to read and interpret the language ofthe crew as well as English. Same as type 1 Same as type 1 Same as type 1 Experience 80% 1 season 60% 1 season 20% 1 season Agency only Full Time Organized Crew Yes (work and train asa unit 40 hours per week) NoNo No Communications 8 programmable radios 4 programmable radios 4 programmable radios 2-4 programmable radios Sawyers 4 agency-certified as intermediate faller (FAL2) and50% of crew certified as basic faller (FAL3) or better 3 agency-qualified None 2 FAL3 Training As required bythe SIHCO or agency policy prior to assignment Basic firefighter training and/or annual firefighter safety refresher prior to assignment Basic firefighter training and/or annual firefighter safety refresher prior to assignment Basic firefighter training or once qualified, 4 hours annual fireline refresher training prior to assignment Logistics Crew-level agency purchasing authority No purchasing authority No purchasing authority Self-sufficient for48 hours; purchasing authority recommended Maximum Weight 5,300 lbs. (6,625 lbs. maximum for25- person crew) 5,300 lbs. 5,300 lbs. 4,505 lbs.
Minimum Standards Type 1 Type 2 with Initial Attack Capability Type 2 Fire Suppression Module1 Dispatch Availability Available nationally Available nationally Variable Variable Production Factor 1.0 .8 .8 Variable Transportation Own transportation Transportation needed Transportation needed Own transportation Tools and Equipment Fully equipped Not equipped Not equipped Variable Personal Gear Arrives with crew first aid kit, personal first aid kit, headlamp, 1qt. canteen, web gear, sleeping bag Same as type 1 Same as type 1 Same as type 1PPE All standard designated fireline PPE All standard designated fireline PPE All standard designated fireline PPE All standard designated fireline PPE Certification Must be annually certified bythe local host unit agency administrator or designee prior to being made available for assignment. N/AN/AN/A 1Fire suppression modules will be statused, mobilized, and tracked in IROC using the resource identifier “Module, Suppression.” • 1BLM – BLM will not follow these standards. See chapter 2for standards and certification requirements. • 1FS – USFS fire suppression modules are used primarily for wildfire suppression, fuels reduction, and other fire management duties. Wildland Fire Modules The primary mission ofa wildland fire module (WFM) isto provide an innovative, safe, highly mobile, logistically independent, and versatile fire module with a primary commitment to maintain fire’s role asa natural ecological process for wildland fire management and incident operations. WFMs are comprised of7-10 firefighters. The WFM program facilitates the use of fire and other management techniques involving planned and unplanned wildland fire events. WFMs are highly skilled and versatile fire crews, which provide technical and ecological-based expertise inthe areas of long-term planning, ignitions, holding, and suppression, and fire effects monitoring. For more information, please refer to NWCG Standards for Wildland Fire Module Operations, PMS 430. Wildland Fire Module Policy All WFM operations will be conducted adhering tothe NWCG Standards for Wildland Fire Module Operations (PMS 430). Sponsoring units in conjunction with the appropriate GACC will ensure compliance ofall WFMs according tothe standards set within the PMS 430. The arduous duties, specialized assignments, and operations ina variety of geographic areas require WFMs to have uniform training, agency approved equipment, communications, organization, and operating procedures. Wildland Fire Module Types and Certification WFMs ready for assignment will be certified as type 1WFM (WFM1) or type 2WFM (WFM2). Refer tothe NWCG Standards for Wildland Fire Module Operations (PMS 430) for additional information. Wildland Fire Module Availability Periods WFMs will have minimum availability periods as defined inthe PMS 430. Availability for type 1 WFMs may exceed the minimum period defined. Type 1 WFMs will be available for off unit assignment during the designated 90-day availability period. The module leader will inform the local supervisor and the GACC ofany changes tothe module’s availability. Wildland Fire Module Organization Individual module structures vary based on local and agency needs using the following standard positions: module leader/foreman, assistant leader/foreman, lead firefighter, senior firefighter, crewmember. Minimum Wildland Fire Module Standards for Interagency Mobilization Note: Other than the qualifications held bythe module leader and assistant all other qualifications are not tied toa particular position.
Minimum Standards Type 1 Type 2 Fireline Capability Ability to form separate logistically self- sufficient independent groups, fireline construction, complex firing operations (backfire), monitoring, strategic planning, fire reconnaissance, public information Monitoring, fireline construction, firing to include burnout Crew Size 7-107-10 Module Qualifications Qualifications are not tied toa particular position within the WFM. All modules will have the following qualifications: RXB2, TFLD, CRWB (other than TFLD), FIRB (other than RXB2), ICT4, 2 ICT5 (other than ICT4), FOBS, 2 FEMO, FFT1 (other than TFLD/CRWB), helicopter long line/remote hookup specialist (HELR) or helicopter crewmember (HECM) All modules will have the following qualifications: CRWB, FIRB, 2 ICT5, 2 FFT1, 2 FEMO (1may bea trainee), HELR or HECM Module Leader Qualifications TFLD, ICT4, RXB2 CRWB, ICT5, FIRB Assistant Module Leader Qualifications CRWB, ICT5, FIRB FFT1, ICT5 Language Requirement All senior leadership, including squad bosses and higher, must be able to read and interpret the language ofthe crew as well as English Same as type 1 Experience 80% > 1 season 60% > 1 season Full Time Organized Crew Yes (work and train asa unit 40 hours per week, 90 continuous days) Same as type 1 Communications 5 programmable radios 4 programmable radios Sawyers 2 agency-qualified 1 agency-qualified Training As required bythe PMS 430 prior to assignment As required bythe PMS 430 prior to assignment Medical First Responder Training Yes Yes Logistics Multiple crew-level, agency purchasing authorities Oneor more crew-level, agency purchasing authority Dispatch Availability Availability determined by sponsoring agency Availability variable by sponsoring agency Mobilization Time Within 2 hours of receipt of resource order when on duty, 8 hours when off duty Within 24 hours of receipt of resource order Transportation Own transportation Own transportation Tools and Equipment Fully equipped for each geographic region Fully equipped for each geographic region Specialized Digital, Remote Operations, Monitoring, Equipment YesNo Personal Gear Arrives with crew first aid kit, personal first aid kit, headlamp, 1 quart canteen, web gear, sleeping bag Arrives with crew first aid kit, personal first aid kit, headlamp, 1 quart canteen, web gear, sleeping bag PPE All standard designated fireline PPE All standard designated fireline PPE Certification Must be annually certified bythe regional or state office ofthe host unit agency administrator or designee prior to being made available for assignment. Follow PMS 430 guidelines. Must complete the mobilization checklist bythe local host unit or agency administrator or designee prior to being made available for assignment. Follow PMS 430 guidelines. • BLM – BLM WFMs will meet standards identified inthe NWCG Standards for Wildland Fire Module Operations (PMS 430). In addition, BLM WFMs will meet the following requirements: ○ Approval from the Assistant Director, FADis required prior to establishing and/or statusing new type 1/2 WFMs. ○ Fire suppression modules and WFMs are separate and distinct resources. The BLM has established standards for fire suppression modules in chapter 2. Fire managers and ICs should order the appropriate resource to accomplish incident objectives. • BLM – Guidance for position descriptions and selective placement factors canbe found at https://doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/blm-fa/SitePages/BLM-0456-Series-Toolbox.aspx. • NPS – Modules are coordinated regionally and mobilized/demobilized through established ordering channels through the GACCs.
Chainsaw Operators and Fallers Beyond the NWCG faller qualifications established inPMS 310-1, agencies have established additional evaluation and certification requirements. • BLM/NPS/FWS/BIA – Useof the NWCG position task books (PTB) is required. The requirements for final evaluators for each position areas follows: ○ The individual tasks required for completion ofthe FAL3 PTB must be evaluated bya qualified FAL2 or FAL1. The final evaluator’s verification fora FAL3 trainee must be completed bya qualified FAL2 or FAL1. ○ The individual tasks required for completion ofthe FAL2 PTB must be evaluated bya qualified FAL2 or FAL1. The final evaluator’s verification fora FAL2 trainee must be completed bya qualified FAL2 or FAL1. • BLM – The individual tasks required for completion ofthe FAL1 PTB must be evaluated bya qualified FAL1. The final evaluator’s verification fora FAL1 trainee must be completed byany agency Faller Evaluator (FALV) or equivalent. FALV position requirements canbe found at https://doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/blm-fa/fire- operations/SitePages/Chainsaw-Operations.aspx. • NPS/BIA – The individual tasks required for completion ofthe FAL1 PTB must be evaluated bya qualified FAL1. The final evaluator’s verification fora FAL1 trainee must be completed bya qualified FAL1. • FWS – Follow evaluator qualification requirements listed inthe FAL1, FAL2, and FAL3 PTBs. The final certification ofall wildfire faller positions will remain the responsibility ofthe IQCS certifying official. All wildland fire saw operation qualifications are maintained through IQCS and displayed onthe incident qualification card. • BLM – Agency policy and guidance regarding chainsaw operations canbe referenced onthe BLM Fire Operations SharePoint at https://doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/blm-fa/fire-operations/SitePages/Chainsaw- Operations.aspx. • FS – Useof the NWCG combined PTB for FAL1, FAL2, and FAL3 isnot authorized for Forest Service use. Forest Service sawyers will continue touse agency-specific certification processes outlined in Forest Service Manual 2358. ○ Sawyers shall not use saws outside the limits of their certification or qualifications except during formal evaluation proceedings or under the immediate supervision ofa higher-qualified sawyer. ○ All sawyers must comply with FS policy and the FSFAQG requirements for FAL3, FAL2, or FAL1 to operate a chainsaw or crosscut sawon a wildland fire incident. Requirements include:  Possess a current first aid and cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) certification (FSH 6709.11, sec52.3).  Initially complete a nationally recognized sawyer training course (Wildland Fire Chainsaws, S-212).  Completion ofa field proficiency evaluation with appropriate saw operator skill level noted on their National Sawyer Certification Card. ○ The National Sawyer Certification Card is valid for3 years andis subject to review any time prior to expiration. Minimum requirements for sawyer training and field proficiency reevaluation include:  Completion ofa knowledge refresher (classroom or field) anda field proficiency evaluation equivalent tothe initial evaluation.  Sawyer instructors are required tobe recertified by instructing at least one nationally recognized sawyer training curriculum (NRSTC) or refresher NRSTC every three years. ○ FS sawyers may function as evaluators for partner agencies using the FAL3 and FAL2 PTB. ○ Fallers who are certified or recertify after October 1, 2014, will be required tobe certified in progression (i.e., must be FAL3 tobe FAL2). However, ifthe initial evaluation is FAL2, the account manager shall grant the position competency for FAL3. Those certified initially as FAL1 will have position competencies for FAL2 and FAL3 granted. ○ FS will accept other agency chainsaw certifications on incidents occurring onFS lands provided they meet NWCG minimum standards. ○ FS will accept a transferring employee’s faller qualification ifit was certified following the PMS 310-1 standard.
• BIA – Useof FAL1, FAL2 and FAL3 PTBs is mandatory and not upto unit discretion. Position Code Performance Currency Training Currency Fitness Level First Aid and CPR FAL3 3 years S-212 Arduous 2 years FAL2 3 years S-212 Arduous 2 years FAL1 3 years Qualification maintained through performance inthe position Arduous 2 years ○ The FAL1 that needs tobe recertified every 3 years maybe recertified by other agencies. ○ BIA will accept other agencies FAL1 credentials upon hire. ○ Emergency firefighter (AD) chainsaw operators – Chainsaw training is authorized forAD employees who are required to operate chainsaws for fire suppression or hazardous fuels reduction project work. Supervisors of type 2and type 2 initial attack crews who have employees who operate chainsaws must have emergency medical response capabilities. All BIA/Tribal sawyers, including AD's, will maintain first aid and CPRas outlined inthe preceding chart.
Chapter 14 Firefighting Equipment Introduction The agency wildland fire program equipment resources include engines, dozers, water tenders, and other motorized equipment for fire operations. Policy Each state/region will comply with established standards for training, equipment, communications, organization, and operating procedures required to effectively perform arduous duties in multi-agency environments and various geographic areas. Firefighting Engine/Water Tender Common Standards Driving Standard Refer to driving standards in chapter 7. • BIA – Refer to chapter 6for BIA-specific motor vehicle policies. BIA and DOI policies require all personnel who operate a vehicle with a gross vehicle weight (GVW) over 26,000 pounds to have a valid commercial driver’s license (CDL). Engine/Tactical Water Tender Water Reserve Engine/tactical water tender operators will maintain at least 10 percent ofthe pumpable capacity ofthe water tank for emergency engine protection and drafting. Chocks At least one set of wheel chocks will be carried on each engine/water tender and will be properly utilized whenever the engine is parked or left unattended. This includes engine/water tender operation ina stationary mode without a driver “in place.” Fire Extinguisher All engines/water tenders will have at least one5 lb. (minimum), ABC-rated fire extinguisher, either in full view orin a clearly marked compartment. Nonskid Surfaces All surfaces will comply with National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 1906 Standard for Wildland Fire Apparatus requirements. First Aid Kit Each engine/water tender shall carry, ina clearly marked compartment, a fully equipped 20–25-person first aid kit. • BLM – Fire First Response Kits will be carried inall Working Capital Fund 600-class fire vehicles (excluding trailers). Gross Vehicle Weight Each engine and water tender will always have an annually certified weight slip inthe vehicle. Weight slips will show individual axle weights and total GVW. Operators of engines and water tenders must ensure that the maximum certified gross vehicle and axle weight ratings are never exceeded, including gear, personnel, and fuel. The National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 1906 standard of250 pounds per seat position for each person and their personal gear will be used to calculate the loaded weight. • FS – Refer toFSH 7109.19, chapter 30for calculation of rough road factor reduction for driving on rough or unsurfaced roads. Speed Limits Posted speed limits will notbe exceeded. Lighting Headlights and taillights will be illuminated while the vehicle isin motion. All new orders for fire engine apparatus will include an overhead lighting package in accordance with agency standards. Lighting packages will meet NFPA 1906 standards atthe time of manufacture. Engines currently in service maybe equipped with overhead lighting packages. Ared, white, and amber combination isthe accepted color scheme for wildland fire.
Emergency Light Use Emergency lighting will be used only during onsite wildland fire operations orto mitigate serious safety hazards. Overhead lighting and other emergency lighting must meet State code requirements and will be illuminated whenever the visibility is reduced to less than 300 feet. • BLM/NPS/FWS/BIA – See agency chapters or policy for specific guidance. • FS – See FSM 5120, FSM 5130, and FSH 5109.16for red lights and sirens policy. Fire Equipment Maintenance and Inspections Apparatus safety and operational inspections will be accomplished either ona post-fire or daily basis. Offices are required to document these inspections. Periodic maintenance (as required bythe manufacturer) shall be performed atthe intervals recommended and properly documented. All annual inspections will include a pump performance test to ensure the pump/plumbing system is operating at desired specifications (pressure and gallons per minute). Mobile Attack (Pump and Roll) Firefighters must be seated and belted within an enclosed cabor walking alongside the apparatus during mobile attack (pump and roll) operations. Riding, standing, or seated onthe exterior ofthe apparatus is prohibited. Utilization ofthe NFPA 1906 “on-board pump-and-roll fire-fighting position” if equipped, isnot permitted. Firefighting Engines Operational Procedures All engines will be equipped, operated, and maintained within guidelines established bythe Department of Transportation (DOT) and regional/state/local operating plans. All personnel assigned to agency fire engines will meet all gear weight, cube, and manifest requirements specified inthe National Interagency Standards for Resource Mobilization. Engine Typing Engine typing (https://www.nwcg.gov/publications/pms200/equipment-pms-200) and respective standards have been established bythe National Wildfire Coordinating Group (NWCG). Engine Type Structure Wildland Engines Components 12 34 56 7 Tank Minimum Capacity (gal) 300 300 500 750 400 150 50 Pump Minimum Flow (GPM) 1000 500 150 5050 5010 @ Rated Pressure (PSI) 150 150 250 100 100 100 100 Hose 2½” 1200 1000 - - - - - Hose 1½” 500 500 1000 300 300 300 - Hose 1” - - 500 300 300 300 200 Ladders (per NFPA 1901) Yes Yes - - - - - Master Stream 500 GPM (minimum) Yes - - - - - - Pump and Roll - - Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Maximum GVWR (lbs.) - - - - 26,00019,50014,000 Personnel (NWCG minimum) 43 32 22 2 • FS – See Forest Service national engine standards. (https://www.fs.usda.gov/managing-land/fire/engines). Fire Engine Staffing For type 4, 5, 6, and7 engines, minimum staffing istwo individuals oneof which is engine boss qualified. • FWS – For type 4 engines, minimum staffing is three individuals oneof which is engine boss qualified. For type 3 engines, minimum staffing is three individuals, including an engine boss. • BLM – For BLM engine staffing requirements, see chapter 2. • NPS – For NPS engine staffing requirements see chapter 3.
Engine Inventories An inventory of supplies and equipment carried on each vehicle is required to maintain accountability andto obtain replacement items lost or damaged on incidents. Refer to agency-specific requirements regarding standard inventory for engines. • BLM – Refer tothe NFEP website. • FWS – Refer to Fire Management Handbook, chapter 14. Water Tenders Water Tender Typing Water tender typing (https://www.nwcg.gov/publications/pms200/equipment-pms-200) and respective standards have been established by NWCG. Water Tender Type Support Tactical Requirements S1S2 S3T1 T2 Tank Capacity (gal) 4000 2500 1000 2000 1000 Pump Minimum Flow (GPM) 300 200 200 250 250 @Rated Pressure (PSI) 5050 50150 150 Maximum Refill Time (mins) 3020 15 - - Pump and Roll - - - Yes Yes Personnel (min) 11 12 2 Water Tender Qualifications and Staffing Standards Water Tender (Non-Tactical) Qualifications A water tender (non-tactical) must have aCDL (tank endorsement). • BLM – Refer tothe Federal Wildland Fire Qualifications Supplement. Staffing A water tender (non-tactical) maybe staffed with a crew ofone driver/operator when used ina support role asa fire engine refill unit orfor dust abatement. These operators donot have to pass the work capacity test (WCT) but are required to take annual refresher training. • BLM – AWCF class-669, non-tactical water tender maybe staffed with a crew ofone driver/operator when itis used ina support role asa fire engine refill unit orfor dust abatement. These operators will pass the moderate WCT), take BL-300/RT-301 and annual refresher training, and possess aCDL with tank endorsement and air brake endorsement (if applicable). Water Tender (Tactical) Tactical useis defined as “direct fire suppression missions such as pumping hose lays, live reel use, running attack, and use of spray bars and monitors to suppress fires.” Qualifications • BLM – engine operator (ENOP), CDL (tank endorsement) and airbrakes endorsement (if applicable). • NPS/FWS – engine boss (ENGB), CDL (tank endorsement) • FS – firefighter, type 1 (FFT1), CDL Staffing Tactical water tenders will carry a minimum crew oftwo: • BLM – AWCF class-669 tactical water tender shall be staffed with minimum crew ofone engine operator (ENOP) and one firefighter, type 2 (FFT2). • NPS/FWS – One ENGB and one FFT2. • FS – One FFT1 and one FFT1/FFT2.
Dozers/Tractor Plows Dozer/Tractor Plow Training and Qualifications Agency wildland fire dozers/tractor plows will be staffed with personnel that meet the training and experience standards for dozer operator (DZOP) or dozer operator initial attack (DZIA) per the Federal Wildland Fire Qualifications Supplement. While on fire assignments, all operators and support crew will meet personal protective equipment (PPE) requirements. Dozer/Tractor Plow Operational Procedures • Agency-owned-and-operated dozer/tractor plows will be equipped with programmable two-way radios, configured to allow the operator to monitor radio traffic. • Agency and contract dozer/tractor plows will have agency-supplied supervision when assigned toany suppression operations. • Contract dozers must be provided with radio communications, either through a qualified heavy equipment boss (HEQB) oran agency-supplied radio. Contract dozer/tractor plows will meet the specifications identified in their agreement/contract. • Operators of dozer/tractor plows and transport equipment will meet DOT certifications and requirements regarding the use and movement of heavy equipment, including driving limitations, CDL requirements, and pilot car use. All-Terrain Vehicles/Utility-Terrain Vehicles The operation ofall-terrain vehicles (ATV)/utility-terrain vehicles (UTV) canbe high risk. The use of ATVs/UTVs should be evaluated to ensure that useis essential to accomplish the mission, rather than for convenience. • BLM – BLM personnel will not use ATVs for any wildland fire management activity, including preparedness, suppression, prescribed fire, hazardous fuels reduction, post-fire rehabilitation, and emergency stabilization and restoration, regardless of incident jurisdiction or project/activity location. State directors, assistant directors, and the Director, National Operations Center have the authority to approve exceptions to this policy ona case-by-case basis. All requests for exceptions must bein writing and will include: ○ A description ofhow the ATV is essential for the performance of official duties; ○ Analysis ofthe alternatives that were considered; ○ Justification foran ATV being the only viable alternative; and ○ Concurrence bythe applicable field manager, district manager, district safety manager, and the state/center safety manager. Cost isnot a basis for approval ofan exception andno exceptions maybe made tothe existing banon industrial useof ATVs. • BIA – All BIA programs will cease the procurement of ATVs used for wildland fire management activities (including preparedness, suppression, prescribed fire, hazardous fuels reduction, post-fire rehabilitation, and emergency stabilization and restoration). BIA personnel will not utilize ATVs for any wildland fire management activities, regardless of incident jurisdiction or project/activity location. • BIA – Programs may continue to procure and utilize other commercially available UTVs, provided the vehicle has manufactured-installed seat belts, a steering wheel, isa multi-seat or newly available single-seat model, andis equipped with a certified rollover protection structure (ROPS) designed and installed bythe original equipment manufacturer as standard equipment. • BLM/BIA – Employees of cooperating agencies/entities may utilize ATVs onBLM/BIA incidents if allowed by their individual agency/entity policy. ATV/UTV operators will meet the training and certification requirements of their agency; employees certified by their agency will be considered qualified ATV/UTV operators regardless of incident jurisdiction. Common policy requirements for wildland fire operations are highlighted below: • Ajob hazard analysis (JHA)/risk assessment (RA) must be completed and approved bythe supervisor prior to vehicle operation. • All personnel authorized to operate anATV/UTV must first complete agency-specific or manufacturer-provided training in safe operating procedures and appropriate PPE. ○ BLM – BLM offices may use either UTV training that is commercially available from the Recreational Off- Highway Vehicle Association (ROHVA) or continue touse the current version (8/2018) ofthe BLM UTV Operator Field Training Range Cards to train their employees who use UTVs. If offices choose touse ROHVA’s driver course, they must continue to train employees onUTV loading/unloading, trailer use, and winch operations as prescribed in lesson plans eight through tenof the BLM UTV range cards prior to employees engaging in these activities. This change does not affect the requirement for UTV riders to
complete the DOI Talent course, “Introduction to Utility Terrain Vehicle Operation” asa prerequisite tothe field training provided by either ROHVA orthe BLM range cards. • Reevaluation/Recertification – Operators shall be reevaluated every three years. Infrequent users (less than 16 hours of riding a year) shall have a check ride prior to scheduled useof anATV/UTV. • Specific authorization for ATV/UTV use is required. All ATV/UTV operations must hold a valid Motor Vehicle Operator’s Identification Card, OF-346, or agency equivalent. ○ BLM – Upon completion ofUTV training and operator certification requirements, UTV operator (UTVO) will be placed onthe employee’s incident qualification card. Incident Qualifications and Certification System (IQCS) certifying officials are responsible for verifying that UTV operator qualifications are current, and that the UTVO qualification is removed from the incident qualification card if training, certification, or currency requirements lapse. ○ NPS/FWS – Upon completion of agency-specific ATV/UTV training and operator certification requirements, All-terrain vehicle operator (ATVO) will be placed onthe employee’s incident qualification card. IQCS certifying officials are responsible for verifying that ATV/UTV operator qualifications are current, and that the ATVO qualification is removed from the incident qualification card if agency-specific training, certification, or currency requirements lapse. ○ NPS – All off-highway vehicle (OHV) operators (including ATV/UTV) must hold a valid State motor vehicle operator’s permit. Operating restrictions (e.g., useof corrective lenses) identified onthe operator’s permit must be adhered to while operating anOHV. NPS ATV operators must be qualified at either the basic or advanced level as described in Reference Manual-50B (RM-50B) depending onthe hazard potential ofthe operation. All ATV operators shall be provided refresher training each year in accordance with aJHA and reevaluated byan ASI-certified trainer every 3 years. The reevaluation shall be documented. RM-50B, appendix B (ATV Operator Accountability/Certification Tracking Record) maybe used to document the reevaluation. Further information onATV/UTV use is found inRM-50B. ○ BIA – BIA and Tribal UTV operators must enroll in, and complete, a certified Recreational Off-Highway Vehicle Association (ROHVA) operators’ program and attain a completion certificate. Alternatively, employees can also take UTVO training from a qualified BIA/Tribal staff member who has competed and been certified asa ROHVA instructor. These certifications should be entered as supporting documentation in IQCS and may be subject to audit during preparedness reviews. Upon completion ofUTV training and operator certification requirements, UTV operator (UTVO) will be placed onthe employee’s Incident qualification card. IQCS certifying officials are responsible for verifying that UTV operator qualifications are current, and that the UTVO qualification is removed from the Incident qualification card if training, certification, or currency requirements lapse. • ATVs can only have a single rider—passengers are prohibited even ifthe ATVis designed for two riders. • UTVs passengers are limited tothe number of seats installed bythe manufacturer. The operator and passenger(s) must use seatbelts while the vehicle isin motion. • Operators must use required PPE while loading/unloading ATV/UTV. • Cargo loads shall be loaded and secured asto not affect the vehicle’s center of gravity and shall not exceed manufacturer’s recommendations for maximum carrying capacity; and • When transporting external fuel containers with aUTV/ATV, a5 lb., class BC fire extinguisher must be secured tothe UTV/ATV. Required PPE ATV Head Protection for Wildland Fire Operations • ATV helmets must be always worn during ATV operations (onand off the fireline); and • ATV helmets must meet Snell SA2010, SA2015, orDOT certification. ○ A¾-face model meeting Snell SA2010, SA2015 certification is acceptable for use. ○ Useof half “shorty” helmets requires aJHA/RAfor fireline use and must include justification for its use. Refer tothe National Technology and Development Program (NTDP) formerly known as Missoula Technology and Development Center (MTDC) Tech Tip publication, A Helmet for ATV Operators with Fireline Duties (0651-2350-MTDC).
UTV Head Protection for Wildland Fire Operations • Helmets must meet DOTor Snell SA2010, SA2015 certification unless: ○ UTVis used for low speeds and smooth travel surfaces, administrative use (e.g., campgrounds, incident base camps) UTV operators are not required to wear helmets; or ○ UTVis equipped with approved rollover protection system (ROPS). • BLM – A comprehensive and properly prepared RAof the specific conditions demonstrates no more than a medium residual risk level, then a helmet meeting NFPA 1977 or ANSI Z89.1 type 1, class G standards maybe worn with chin strap secured in place under chin. • NPS – Approved helmets are required for UTV operations that are rated moderate (amber) or high (red) using the “ORV Risk Assessment Tool” included inthe NPS Off-Highway Vehicle Policy. • FWS – Per 243 FW6.6B.1, a hardhat meeting NFPA 1977 or ANSI Z89.1 standards maybe worn with chin straps secured in place unless the risk assessment for the operation dictates wearing a securely fastened motorcycle helmet. • FS – UTV helmet (for fire use): must meet the policy within the Safety Handbook (6709.11), chapter 70, 71.12; Exhibit 01 states “Specialized Equipment, such as ATVs, UTVs, Dirt Bikes, Snowmobiles (Department of Transportation-approved helmet).” Wearing hardhats while driving or riding ona UTVis not allowed. Forest Service policy provides no exception tothe helmet requirement for low speeds, smooth travel surfaces, or administrative use. UTV helmet (for fire use) requirements are the same asATV use. Helmets must meet Snell, orDOT ANSI certification. A¾-face model meeting Snell orDOT certification is acceptable for use. Useof half “shorty” helmets requires aJHA/RAfor fireline use approved bythe incident commander (IC) or relevant line officer and must include justification for its use. Refer to MTDC Tech Tip5 publication, A Helmet for ATV Operators with Fireline Duties (0651-6 2350-MTDC). • BIA – UTV helmet (for fire use) must be worn. Helmets must meet DOTor Snell SA2010, SA2015 certification. Hardhats are not approved for wildland fire operations (non-administrative use). Eye Protection • Eye protection (goggles, face shield, or safety glasses) isnot required fora UTV equipped with an original manufacturer windshield that protects the face from branches, flying debris, etc., unless otherwise required byan associated industrial use activity orJHA/RA. Other Protection If operating anATV/UTVon the fireline, the following are required: • Leather or leather-/flame-resistant combination gloves. Flame-resistant flight gloves or NFPA-1977-compliant driving gloves canbe used by heavy equipment operators, drivers, and fireline supervisors when not using fireline hand tools. • National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 1977-compliant, long-sleeved, flame-resistant shirt (yellow recommended). • NFPA-1977-compliant, flame-resistant trousers. • Wildland fire boots. • Appropriate head protection as described above. ○ FS – Shirt, trousers, and gloves used by USFS personnel must meet Forest Service specification 5100-91 (shirt), 5100-92 (trousers), 6170-5 (gloves), orbe NFPA 1977-compliant. ATV/UTV operator shall carry a personal communication device (e.g., two-way radio, cellular phone, or satellite phone). All other ATV/UTV specific guidance is found inthe respective agency’s policy: • BLM – Refer toBLM Handbook 1112-1, chapter 17. • NPS – Refer toRM-50B Occupational Health and Safety (https://www.nps.gov/subjects/policy/directors- orders.htm), Section 6.1Off-Highway Vehicle Safety. • FWS – Refer to243 FW6. Vehicle Cleaning/Invasive Species Prevention Refer to chapter 11for guidance on minimizing potential transmission of invasive species. Incident Remote Automatic Weather Stations Incident remote automatic weather stations (IRAWS – NFES 5869) are readily deployable, portable weather stations that maybe utilized in unprepared locations to monitor local weather conditions. IRAWS are intended for use onor near the fireline orat other all-hazards incidents and are installed by National Interagency Fire Center (NIFC)
technicians and operated as desired by fire behavior analysts (FBAN) and/or incident meteorologists (IMET) to record and distribute real time weather data. National resource IRAWS systems are cached at NIFC and may be ordered through standard equipment resource ordering systems. Following release from an incident, these stations must be returned tothe Remote Sensing/Fire Weather Support Unit (RSFWSU) at NIFC for maintenance, recalibration, and redeployment. Aerial Ignition Devices Information on types of aerial ignition devices, operational guidelines, and personnel qualifications maybe found inthe NWCG Standards for Aerial Ignition, PMS 501. Ground Ignition Devices and Transporting/Dispensing Fuel For ground ignition devices, follow the NWCG Standards for Ground Ignition Equipment, PMS 443, for operational guidelines, personnel qualifications, and equipment selection. • BLM – A10 lb., class BC fire extinguisher is required for UTVs equipped with a ground ignition device. For transporting and dispensing fuel, follow NWCG Standards for Transporting Fuel, PMS 442. • BLM – All Drip torches must meet United States Forest Service (USFS) specification 5100-614. • NPS – Follow the Forest Service standard for military style jerrican (UN3A1) (PMS 442, page 8). • FS – Direction is found inFSH 6709.11.
CUI CUI Chapter 15 Communications Policy Agency-specific policies for radio communications maybe found in: • DOI – Department ofthe Interior (DOI), Department Manual, Radio Communications Handbook (377DM). • BLM – Bureau of Land Management Radio Communications Manual (MS-1292), BLM Radio Frequency Authorization Manual (MS-1291), Frequency Authorizations Handbook (H-1291-1), Communications Tower Climbing Program Handbook (H-1292-1), Radio Frequency Exposure Awareness Handbook (H-1292-2), Radio Site facilities Standards Handbook (H-1292-3). https://doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/blm-fa-nros/SitePages/Radio%20Manuals%20and%20Handbooks.aspx • FS – USDA Forest Service Handbook (FSH) 6609.14, chapters 10-40and Forest Service Manual (FSM) 6600 Systems Management, chapter 6640 – Telecommunications. Dispatch Recording Devices Recording of phone calls without all party’s prior knowledge and consent isnot permitted. Recording of radio traffic is appropriate. • BLM – Radio recording devices will be used byBLM dispatch offices orany interagency office dispatching BLM resources. Follow the fire dispatch audio tapes records retention and disposition schedule (https://doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/blm-oc- dirm/BLMrec/Records%20Schedules/Combined_Records_Schedules_01-32.pdf). Cellular/Smartphone/Satellite Phone Communications Cellular/smartphone/satellite telephones maybe used to supplement tactical or operational traffic using agency approved applications. Cellular/smartphone/satellite telephones will notbe used for flight following in lieu of normal flight following procedures. Telephone/smartphone/satellite communications/applications maybe used for logistical purposes (TAK, PTToC, etc.). Refer to chapter 7for policy regarding useof mobile devices while operating a vehicle. Radio Communications Radio communications provide for the information needed for the command/control and safety of personnel and resources. Radio Contracts Radios used for fire and aviation activities must be identified onthe Fire Approved Radio list. The Approved Radios List is available onthe NIICD website (https://www.nifc.gov/resources/NIICD) or contact your agency Telecommunications Department orthe NIICD engineer at (208) 387-5720. Radio Frequency Management Under Executive Order 13556 andin accordance with DOI/USDA policies and guidelines, all documents which include DOI/USDA frequencies are considered tobe Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI) and must be controlled and marked as such following the guidance ofthe National Archives CUI Marking Handbook, version 1.1. Any documents containing frequency information whose dissemination isnot controlled with a password, must be labeled atthe top and bottom of each page with “CUI” and controlled as such. Prior to their use and transmission, all frequency-modulated (FM) and amplitude-modulated (AM) frequencies require permission from their formally appointed frequency management personnel atthe local, state, regional, or national level. Radio interference must be reported to National Interagency Fire Center (NIFC) communications duty officer (CDO)/communications coordinator (COMC) (when assigned) when adversely impacting incident communications. Minimum reporting information: location, radio frequency, time and date (including interference duration), and sound or source for interference.
CUI CUI Daily, Initial Attack and Airtanker Base Frequency Management Frequency assignments for normal daily and initial attack operations are made ona permanent basis and are requested through the normal radio frequency authorization process from the local, State, regional or national level designated frequency management personnel. For air operations, the NIFC CDO coordinates annually with the Forest Service and DOI frequency managers to provide initial attack air-to-ground (A/G) FM frequencies, and with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to provide initial attack air-to-air (A/A) AMand airtanker base frequencies. Initial attack A/GFM frequencies are carefully engineered for use by Forest Service and DOI frequency managers to ensure that the frequencies will not cause interference to, or receive interference from, other licensed users. These frequencies are authorized for use only within their assigned frequency zone boundaries. Any use of these frequencies outside ofthe frequency zone boundaries may cause interference with other authorized users and will be considered a safety violation in regard tothe protection of life and/or property and could have major consequences. Therefore, any changes to dispatch areas that result in being responsible for areas outside ofthe existing frequency boundaries must result ina coordinated effort between dispatch centers, ensuring that only frequencies assigned within the appropriate frequency zone are used. Updated frequency information is coordinated annually with the Geographic Area Coordination Centers (GACC). Onan annual basis the FAA engineers airtanker base frequencies and initial attack A/AAM frequencies for use bythe wildland fire community. The airtanker base frequencies are engineered for use within a40-nautical-mile radius (unless otherwise specified) from the base center point and the initial attack A/AAM frequencies are engineered for use only within their assigned frequency zone boundaries. Both are designed for use below 5,000 feet above ground level (AGL). These frequencies are engineered bythe FAAto minimize the risk of causing interference with civilian aircraft or airports located within the same geographic areas. Any use of these frequencies outside ofthe provided service volume is considered a major safety violation bythe FAA and may result inthe removal ofand/or denial ofuse for those frequencies. All initial attack frequency assignments are depicted on maps disseminated annually bythe CDO through the NIICD National FireNet SharePoint site. For access tothe appropriate folder, contact the CDO. Mutual Aid Frequency Management Mutual aid frequency sharing agreements canbe made atthe local level. Agreements are only approved inthe specific location where assigned. Prohibited • Useof mutual-aid-frequency outside assigned area; and • Formal agreements for mutual aid using NIFC national fire frequencies. Exception • Agency with Radio Frequency Authorization (RFA) approved by National Telecommunications Information Agency (NTIA) for frequency inthe NIFC Channeling Plan; notification and coordination with NIFC CDO required. Incident Frequency Management National level coordination and assignments of incident frequencies isthe responsibility of NIICD andis performed bythe NIFC CDO. When communications requirements exceed normal operations, the NIFC CDO may request that GACCs assign a communication coordinator (COMC) to facilitate geographic area frequency management. Additional information isin the National Interagency Standards for Resource Mobilization (https://www.nifc.gov/nicc/logistics/reference- documents). • Frequencies for incidents are assigned bythe NIFC CDO and are managed bya qualified communications unit leader (COML). The COML will request, assign, and report all frequencies used onthe incident tothe NIFC CDO/COMC. This will include the request and assignment ofall aircraft frequencies. Frequency use will be documented onthe ICS-205 (Incident Radio Communications Plan) andon ICS-220 (Air Operation Summary) forms. These completed forms will be made available to incident personnel inthe incident action plan (IAP). • Incidents that donot have an assigned COML, will coordinate and request all frequency and communication equipment needs through the COMC and/orthe NIFC CDO.
CUI CUI If additional frequencies are required, the COML will order them through the established ordering process. Additional frequencies maybe available ona temporary basis and may be requested bythe NIFC CDO from the Washington Office (WO) spectrum managers when: • The NIICD national frequencies are all committed within a specific geographic area; and/or • New incidents within a complex create a need for additional frequencies; and/or • The fire danger rating is extreme and the potential for additional new incidents is high; and/or • There is frequency congestion dueto incidents in close proximity. Aviation Operations Frequency Management • Air-to-air: AM frequencies are requested via the NIFC CDO who then coordinates with the FAA. Frequencies are engineered bythe FAA with a service volume of20 nautical mile (NM) radius with 5,000-feet AGL from incident latitude/longitude or other provided center point. Ifthe needs ofthe incident require a larger radius, a request should be made through the NIFC CDOto be coordinated with the FAA. • Air-to-ground: FM frequencies will be authorized by agency frequency managers and coordinated and assigned bythe NIFC CDO. Frequencies are assigned for incident use with a service volume of20 NM radius from incident latitude/longitude or other provided center point and3,000-feet AGL per agency RFA. • With the exception ofan emergency, aircraft shall not transmit over NIICD command repeaters. National Interagency Fire Tactical Frequencies Shared fire frequencies are approved for ground tactical operations (line of sight) on incidents. Prohibited use includes: • Air-to-air communications; and • Air-to-ground communications. Permission touse these frequencies requires submitting a request using the proper IROC ordering procedure from the NIFC CDO. Both AMand FM aviation frequency assignments will be used onan interagency basis anda master record of these assignments is maintained bythe NIFC CDO. Preassigned National Frequencies National Air Guard Frequency (168.6250 MHz) A national interagency air guard frequency will be used for emergency aviation communications. Continuous monitoring of this frequency is mandatory by agency dispatch centers and aircraft. A Continuous Tone-Coded Squelch System (CTCSS) tone of110.9Hz must be used when transmitting onthe National Air Guard Frequency. This frequency must be programmed into the last channel of every group in fire handheld radios. This frequency, 168.6250 MHz, is only used for: • Air-to-air emergency contact and coordination; • Ground-to-air emergency contact; and • Initial call, recall, and redirection of aircraft when no other contact frequency is available. National Flight Following Frequency (168.6500 MHz) The National Flight Following frequency is used to monitor interagency and contract aircraft. All aircraft on point- to-point or mission flights should establish/terminate flight following and confirm Automated Flight Following (AFF) onthe National Flight Following frequency. The National Flight Following frequency isto be used for flight following, dispatch, or redirection of aircraft. No other uses, including tactics and logistics, are authorized. All dispatch centers/offices will monitor the National Flight Following frequency atall times. A CTCSS tone of110.9 must be used when transmitting and receiving onthe National Flight Following frequency. Smokejumper and Rappel/RADS Air-to-Ground Frequency (168.5500 MHz) Frequency 168.5500 MHzis primarily dedicated asa national air-to-ground tactical channel for smokejumper operations within the DOI, USDA, and other agencies. Secondary useis authorized for BLM and USFS Rappel/Rope Assisted Delivery System (RADS) aerial delivery operations. The channel must be toned on both transmit and receive for all smokejumper and RADS teams to ensure that interference issues are avoided. Smokejumpers will use tone 123.0, and RADS will use 110.9. Useof this frequency other than for the delivery ofCUI CUI aerial firefighters is prohibited. This frequency isnot approved for ground tactical operations (line of sight) on incidents asa tactical or intra-crew channel. Governmentwide Area Common User Frequencies (163.1000 MHz, 168.3500 MHz) Shared frequencies 163.1000 and 168.3500 MHz are used ona non-interference basis and are not exclusive toany user. These frequencies are intended for administration use only. They are prohibited by USDA and DOI for use during air-to-ground operations and operations involving the protection of life and property. No protection from interference will be provided toany station operating on these frequencies from other stations operating onthe same frequency. The use of equipment with coded squelch is strongly encouraged to reduce nuisance interference from other users. Permission touse these frequencies for incident use, requires submitting a request using the proper IROC ordering procedure from the NIFC CDO. • NOTE: When traveling between incidents, be sure to monitor for incident radio traffic inthe area before using these frequencies. Incident Radio Support All National Interagency Incident Communication Division (NIICD) communications equipment will be returned to NIFC immediately after the incident is turned over tothe local jurisdictional agency unless otherwise coordinated with the NIICD CDO/COMC. To meet the high demand for NIICD communications equipment during peak fire seasons, please follow the following NIICD basic operating procedure when shipping communications equipment back to NIFC: Preparedness Level 1-2 • Return communications equipment by lowest cost • Return any unused or broken equipment to NIICD Preparedness Level 3-4 • Expedite communications equipment return by best means • Return any unused or broken equipment to NIICD • Ground freight if possible • Should arrive at NIICD within 4-5 days Preparedness Level 5 • Return communications equipment by fastest means • Return any unused or broken equipment to NIICD • Overnight NIICD equipment if possible • Utilize local drivers for GACCs within 8-hour drive time from NIICD Note: The ordering incident is responsible for returning and/or coordinating all NIICD radio equipment directly back to NIFC by; arranging shipping through the local buying team, arranging shipping through the local district office, or arranging shipping through the local supply caches. NIICD communications equipment shall NOTbe moved from one incident to another without being first returned to NIICD for refurbishment. Unused and sealed equipment maybe moved, but only upon approval ofthe NIFC CDOor COMC. Military Communications onan Incident Military units assigned toan incident are provided NIICD communications equipment. Each battalion is typically assigned 80 handheld radios. Intercrew communications within a military unit is provided bythe military on their radios and frequencies. All incident frequencies are assigned bythe COML using form ICS-205. Some military units have aviation VHF-FM radios compatible with civilian systems. Other units must be provided VHF-FM radios prior to dispatch toan incident. Wiring harnesses and radios will be ordered bythe incident. The resource order will include a request for qualified personnel from NIICD to perform the installation ofthe equipment.
Chapter 16 Aviation Operations and Resources Purpose and Scope Aviation resources are one ofa number of tools available to accomplish fire-related land management objectives. Aviation use must be prioritized based on management objectives and probability of success. The effect of aviation resources ona fire is directly proportional tothe speed at which the resource(s) can initially engage the fire, the effective capacity ofthe aircraft, and the deployment of ground resources. These factors are magnified by flexibility in prioritization, mobility, positioning, and utilization ofthe versatility of many types of aircraft. In addition tothe priorities listed inthe National Interagency Standards for Resource Mobilization (https://www.nifc.gov/nicc/logistics/reference-documents), chapter 10 under headings “Total Mobility” and “Priorities,” mobilization of aircraft should be based on optimizing the use of exclusive-use, contracted aircraft. Call-when-needed (CWN) aircraft will bethe last ordered and the first released. The exception to this isuse for initial action response and capability. Risk management isa necessary requirement for the useof any aviation resource. The risk management process must include risk to ground resources and the risk ofnot performing the mission, as well asthe risk tothe aircrew. Organizational Responsibilities National Office – Department ofthe Interior Office of Aviation Services The Office of Aviation Services (OAS) is responsible for the coordination of aviation policy development and maintenance management within the agencies ofthe Department ofthe Interior (DOI). The OAS hasno operational responsibility. The OAS provides aviation safety program oversight, accident investigation, and inspection/approval of aircraft and pilots for DOI agencies. Bureau of Land Management The National Aviation Office (NAO) develops BLM policy, procedures, and standards and maintains functional oversight and facilitates interagency coordination for all aviation activities. The principal goals are safety and cost- effectiveness. The NAO supports BLM aviation activities and missions, including fire suppression, through strategic program guidance, managing aviation programs of national scope, coordination with OAS, and interagency partners. The Fire and Aviation Directorate has the responsibility and authority, after consultation with state fire management officers (FMO), for funding and acquisition ofall fire aircraft, prioritizing the allocation ofBLM aircraft ona bureauwide basis, and approving state office requests to acquire supplemental aircraft resources. Refer toBLM National Aviation Plan and Manual 9400 for aviation policy and guides. Refer to112 DM12 fora list of responsibilities. National Park Service The Branch of Aviation develops NPS policy, procedures, and standards for all fire and non-fire aviation activities. This includes providing guidance on fire suppression, as well as standardizing aviation programs atthe national level, coordinating with OAS and interagency partners. The Branch of Aviation also has responsibility for operational execution ofthe aviation program. The branch ensures personnel receive aviation training, provides internal training for fleet pilots, has responsibility for quality assurance and quality control of park aviation programs and provides fiscal analysis to determine numbers and types of aircraft for the NPS. Bureau of Indian Affairs The BIA Aviation Branch Office is responsible for supporting all BIA aviation operations within Indian Affairs through an active and professional aviation organization that: • Develops and coordinates efficient aviation policy and management processes; • Provides guidance for aviation programmatic and operational risk management; • Leads aviation safety assurance and promotion programs; • Provides aircraft acquisition support as specified by Indian Affairs management objectives; and • Develops and promotes a skilled aviation management workforce. • For policy, guidance, and responsibilities, refer to Indian Affairs Manual, Part 57, DOI Departmental Manual, Parts 112, 350, 351, 352, and 353, and the BIA National Aviation Plan.
• Works with the BIA Aviation Branch Office for planning and ordering ofUAS modules. The BIA regional office is responsible reassigning and movement of assigned UAS modules within their regional jurisdiction in coordination with the BIA Aviation Branch Office, local dispatch centers, and interagency aviation managers. National Office – U.S. Department of Agriculture Forest Service TheFS has responsibility for all aspects ofits aviation program, including aviation policy and budget development, aircraft acquisition, aircraft operations, aviation safety and risk management, budget, pilot standardization, and airworthiness. In addition, theFS has operational responsibility for functional oversight of aviation assets and facilities, operational coordination and utilization, accident investigation, and aircraft and pilot inspection. The Assistant Director (AD), Aviation, is responsible tothe Director of Fire and Aviation Management for the management and supervision ofthe national headquarters office in Washington, D.C., and the national office in Boise. TheAD, Aviation provides leadership, support and coordination for national and regional aviation programs and operations. Refer toFSM 5704 for list of responsibilities. The fixed-wing branch chief and rotor-wing branch chief report tothe AD aviation and are responsible for national aviation operational management and oversight. This operational management and oversight includes authority to provide direction to coordination centers regarding the mobilization and reassignment of USDA contracted national aviation resources. The branch chiefs may also delegate this authority to national aircraft coordinators orthe FS aviation duty officer (ADO). The Branch Chief, Airworthiness reports tothe AD, aviation, andis responsible for national aircraft airworthiness and maintenance program management and oversight. The Branch Chief, Aviation business operations reports tothe AD, Aviation andis responsible for policy maintenance and development, budget development, and planning. The Aviation Strategic Planner reports tothe AD, Aviation andis responsible for strategic planning and reporting. The Branch Chief, Aviation Safety Management Systems reports tothe AD Aviation, andis responsible for oversight, coordination and direction of aviation safety management system functions. State/Regional Office • BLM – State FMOs are responsible for providing oversight for aircraft hosted in their state. State FMOs have the authority and responsibility to approve, with national office concurrence, acquisition of supplemental aircraft resources within their state. State FMOs have the authority to prioritize the allocation, prepositioning and movement ofall aircraft assigned tothe BLM within their state. State offices will coordinate with the national office on movement of their aircraft outside of their state. The IROC status ofBLM exclusive use air attack aircraft and personnel will be updated daily as GACC available. Aircraft and personnel will be released from incident atthe endof each dayto be available forIA the following day. Aircraft will notbe designated as available "local only." A state aviation manager (SAM) is located in each state office. SAMs are designated asthe contracting officer’s representative (COR) for all exclusive-use aircraft hosted by their state. SAMs implement aviation program objectives and directives to support the agency mission and state objectives. A state aviation plan is required to outline the state aviation program objectives andto identify state-specific policy and procedures. • NPS – A regional aviation manager (RAM) is designated for each region. RAMs oversee the tactical execution of their region’s aviation programs and provide technical expertise and aviation safety oversight ofthe parks in their geographic area. RAMs observe regional aviation activities and provide liaison with the National Branch of Aviation and other agencies as appropriate. A regional aviation operations and management plan is required to outline the region’s aviation program objectives andto identify region-specific policy and procedures. • FWS – A regional aviation manager (RAM) is designated for each region. RAMs implement aviation program objectives and directives to support the agency mission and region objectives. Several regions have additional support staff, and/or pilots assigned to support aircraft operations andto provide technical expertise. A regional aviation operations and management plan is required to outline the region’s aviation program objectives andto identify region-specific policy and procedures. • FS – Regional aviation officers (RAOs) are responsible for directing and managing regional aviation programs in accordance with the national and regional aviation management plans, and applicable agency policy direction. (Refer toFSM 5700 and FSH 5709.16for list of responsibilities). RAOs report to director of fire and aviation for their specific region. Regional aviation safety managers (RASMs) are responsible for aviation safety in their respective regions, and work closely with the RAO to ensure aviation safety isan organizational priority (refer toFSM 5700 and FSH 5709.16for list of responsibilities). Most regions have additional aviation
technical specialists and pilots who help manage and oversee the regional aviation programs. Most regions also have aviation maintenance inspectors, fixed-wing program managers, helicopter program managers, helicopter operations specialists, inspector pilots, etc. • BIA – ○ Provides oversight and approval ofthe acquisition and use ofBIA aircraft within their region; ○ Has the authority to prioritize the allocation, reallocation, prepositioning, and movement ofall aircraft assigned tothe BIA within their region. All movements will be coordinated with the Aviation Branch Office; ○ Manages and provides oversight ofall BIA aircraft assigned tothe region; ○ Coordinates with agencies, geographical coordination centers, Aviation Branch Office, and aircraft coordinators on aviation resources assigned to their region; ○ Ensures all region assigned aviation resources are effectively utilized as efficient BIA resources; ○ Delegates or designates the RAM, who ensures appropriate aviation roles and positions are filled by qualified personnel; ○ Ensures all aviation employees meet DOI and BIA training requirements; and ○ Ensures interagency agreement (IAA) between region and Office of Aviation Services (OAS) Acquisition Services Directorate (ASD) is valid andin force. Coordinate modifications toIAA as projects and missions dictate. Local Office Some areas have interagency aviation programs that utilize an aviation manager for multiple units. Duties are similar as other local level managers. • BLM – Unit aviation managers (UAM) serve asthe focal point for the unit aviation program by providing technical expertise and management of aviation resources to support field office/district programs. Field/district offices are responsible for hosting, supporting, providing daily management, and dispatching all aircraft assigned to their unit. field/district offices have the authority to request additional resources, to establish priorities, and make assignments for all aircraft assigned tothe BLM within their unit or zone. • NPS – Unit or park aviation managers have the responsibility to provide aviation expertise and management of aviation resources at each park unit. For organizational responsibility, refer toDO-60, RM-60. • FS – Unit aviation officers (UAOs)/forest aviation officers (FAOs) have the responsibility for aviation activities atthe local level, including aviation mission planning, risk management and safety, supervision, and evaluation. UAOs/FAOs assist line officers with risk assessment/management and cost analysis. Refer toFSM 5700 Zero Code fora list of responsibilities. • BIA – The AAM/UAM manages the unit aviation program by providing technical and management direction of aviation resources to support BIA programs. The AAM/UAM has functional responsibility inthe following areas: ○ The AAM/UAMis authorized to provide for daily management ofall aviation resources; ○ Ensures agency flight compliance with USDI/BIA/region and agency policies and regulations; ○ Develop and implement the agency/unit aviation management plan, as well as specific operating plans for other aviation programs (e.g., helitack, SEAT, and aerial supervision); ○ Ensures completion ofthe Project Aviation Safety Plan (PASP) with appropriate approvals/briefing of line officer; ○ Ensures that appropriate training is provided to aviation users and supervisors. Monitors aviation training compliance for the agency/unit; ○ Designates and assigns an alternate aviation manager when needed; ○ Ensures that visiting aircrews have received flight crew briefing/aviation orientation and guides; ○ Confirms DOI/BIA/Office of Management and Budget (OMB) requirements are met and completes the cost analysis requirements and schedules the flight with a qualified vendor; ○ Ensures the accuracy ofthe Aircraft Use Report. Processes and maintains copies and records documenting the flight as required bythe DOI Manual; ○ Confirms that a qualified flight manager is assigned toall project/resource flights; ○ Is responsible for the distribution and use ofthe Aviation Boundary Plan/Checklist ifone isin place; ○ Ensures Agency/Unit Aviation Security Plan is current and implemented in accordance with DOI policy; ○ May serve asthe COR for BIA aviation exclusive use contracts within the respective region ifthe aircraft manager isnot current or qualified as such. CORs of exclusive use contracts must have a signed appointment letter from the Contracting Officer; ○ Will serve asthe Project Manager (PM) for “on call and CWN” aviation contracts within the regional jurisdiction. All CORs will be approved bythe BIA Aviation Branch Office and communications will be coordinated through the Aviation Branch Office.
○ Authorized to order approved aircraft utilizing agency procurement documents and procedures. Also establish priorities and allocate all aircraft assigned tothe BIA within their unit or zone; and ○ Maintains anup-to-date aviation reference library with all applicable aviation policy and procedural references. Aviation Information Resources Aviation reference guides and aids for agency aviation management are listed for policy, guidance, and specific procedural requirements. • BLM – 9400 Manual appendix 1, National Aviation Plan (NAP), and applicable aviation guides as referenced inthe NAP. • NPS – RM-60 Aviation Management Reference Manual and applicable aviation guides as referenced inRM-60. • FWS – Service Manual 330-339, Aviation Management and NWCG Standards for Helicopter Operations. • FS – FSM 5700, FSH 5709.16and applicable aviation guides when approved bythe agency and referenced in policy. • BIA – BIA National Aviation Plan (NAP) and applicable aviation guides are references inthe NAP, IAM part 57, andDM 112, 350-353. • DOI – See Departmental manuals (DMs) and operational procedures memoranda (OPMs) canbe found at https://www.doi.gov/aviation/library. Safety alerts, operational alerts, instruction memoranda, information bulletins, incident reports, and other guidance or information are issued as needed. Anup-to-date library with aviation policy and procedural references will be maintained atall permanent aviation bases, dispatch, and aviation management offices. Aviation Safety TheFS, BLM, NPS, and BIA have adopted Safety Management Systems (SMS) asthe foundation for the aviation safety program. The four pillars ofSMS are safety policy, safety risk management, safety assurance, and safety promotion. SMSis the standard for aviation safety setby the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). SMS focuses on: • Emphasis on proactive risk management; • Promotes a “Just” culture; • Addresses systemic safety concerns; • Holds the organization accountable; • Identifies “What” sowe can manage the manageable; and • Communicates the “Why” sothe culture can learn from mistakes. The intent ofSMS isto improve the aviation culture by increasing hazard identification, reduce risk-taking behavior, learn from mistakes, and correct procedures before a mishap occurs rather than after the accident. Additionally, the current approved US Forest Service National Aviation Safety Management System Guide is available at https://www.fs.usda.gov/sites/default/files/2024-05/National-Aviation-Safety-Mgt-System-Guide.pdf. Risk Assessment and Risk Management The use of risk management will help to ensure a safe and successful operation. Risk isthe probability that an event will occur. Assessing risk identifies the hazard, the associated risk, and places the hazard in relationship tothe mission. A decision to conduct a mission requires weighing the risk against the benefit ofthe mission and deciding whether the risks are acceptable. Aviation missions always have some degree of risk. The five sources of hazards are mission, management, machine, personnel, and media. Managing risk isa five-step process: 1. Identify hazards associated with all specified and implied tasks for the mission. 2. Assess hazards to determine potential of occurrence and severity of consequences. 3. Develop controls to mitigate or remove risk and make decisions based on accepting the least risk for the best benefit. 4. Implement controls – (1) education controls, (2) physical controls, and (3) avoidance controls. 5. Supervise and evaluate – enforce standards and continuously reevaluate their effectiveness in reducing or removing risk. Ensure that controls are communicated, implemented, and enforced. • FS – FSM 5700. Employees shall usean operational risk management process to evaluate the risk and hazards prior to every flight.
Howto Properly Refuse Risk (Aviation) Every individual (Government and contracted employees) has the right and obligation to report safety problems affecting hisor her safety and has the right to contribute ideas to correct the hazard. In return, supervisors are expected to give these concerns and ideas serious consideration. When an individual feels an assignment is unsafe, heor she also has the obligation to identify, tothe degree possible, safe alternatives for completing that assignment. Turning down an assignment isone possible outcome of managing risk. A “turn down” isa situation where an individual has determined heor she cannot undertake an assignment as given andis unable to negotiate an alternative solution. The turn down ofan assignment must be based on assessment of risks and the ability ofthe individual or organization to control or mitigate those risks. Individuals may turn down an assignment because of safety reasons when: • There isa violation of regulated safe aviation practices; • Environmental conditions make the work unsafe; or • They lack the necessary qualifications or experience. Individuals will directly inform their supervisor that they are turning down the assignment as given. The most appropriate means of documented turn down criteria is using the Aviation Watch Out Situations (IRPG). Supervisors will notify the air operations branch director (AOBD) or unit aviation leadership immediately upon being informed ofa “turn down.” If there isno AOBD, notification shall goto the appropriate section chief, the incident commander (IC) or local fire and aviation staff. Proper handling of turn downs provides accountability for decisions and initiates communication of safety concerns within the incident organization. Ifthe assignment has been turned down previously and the supervisor asks another resource to perform the assignment, heor sheis responsible to inform the new resource that the assignment had been turned down and the reasons why. Furthermore, personnel need to realize that a “turn down” does not stop the completion ofthe assigned operation. The “turn down” protocol isan integral element that improves the effective management of risk, forit provides timely identification of hazards within the chain of command, raises risk awareness for both leaders and subordinates, and promotes accountability. Ifan unresolved safety hazard exists, the individual needs to communicate the issue/event/concern immediately tohis orher supervisor and document as appropriate. Aviation Safety Support Aviation Safety and Technical Assistance Team (ASTAT) During high levels of aviation activity, consider requesting an Aviation Safety and Technical Assistance Team (ASTAT). ASTAT enhances risk management, efficiency, effectiveness, and provides technical assistance while reviewing aviation operations. Ifan ASTAT cannot be filled internally, the request maybe placed with the National Interagency Coordination Center (NICC) through established ordering channels using individual overhead requests. An ASTAT should operate under a delegation of authority from the appropriate state/regional aviation manager(s) or multi-agency coordinating group. If requested bythe home unit/region, formal written reports will be provided to appropriate manager(s) as outlined atthe in-brief. A team should be developed tofit the need ofthe requesting unit and may consist ofthe following: • Aviation safety manager; • Operations specialist (helicopter and/or fixed wing); • Pilot inspector; • Maintenance inspector; • Avionics inspector (optional); and • Aircraft dispatcher (optional). Aviation Safety Briefing Every passenger must receive a briefing prior to each flight. The briefing isthe responsibility ofthe pilot in command (PIC) but may be conducted bythe pilot, flight manager, helicopter manager, fixed-wing base manager, oran individual with the required training to conduct an aviation safety briefing. The pilot should also receive a mission briefing from the Government aircraft manager. Refer tothe IRPG and NWCG Standards for Helicopter Operations, PMS 510. Aviation Hazard An aviation hazard isany condition, act, or circumstance that compromises the safety of personnel engaged in aviation operations. Pilots, flight crew personnel, aviation managers, incident air operations personnel, and passengers are responsible for hazard identification and mitigation. Aviation hazards may include but are not limited tothe following:
• Deviations from policy, procedures, regulations, and instructions; • Improper hazardous materials handling and/or transport; • Airspace conflicts/flight following deviation; • Deviation from planned operations; • Failure to utilize personal protective equipment (PPE) or aviation life support equipment (ALSE); • Failure to meet qualification standards or training requirement; • Extreme environmental conditions; • Improper ground operations; • Improper pilot procedures; • Fuel contamination; and • Unsafe actions by pilot, air crew, passengers, or support personnel. Aviation hazards also exist inthe form of wires, low-flying aircraft, and obstacles protruding beyond normal surface features. Each office will post, maintain, and annually update a known aerial hazard map for the local geographic area where aircraft are operated, regardless of agency jurisdiction. This map will be posted and used to brief flight crews. Unit aviation managers are responsible for ensuring the development and updating of known aerial hazard maps (NWCG Standards for Helicopter Operations). Aerial Applications of Wildland Fire Chemical Safety Chapter 12 contains information concerning the aerial application of wildland fire chemicals. SAFECOM The DOI and the FS have an incident/hazard reporting form called the Aviation Safety Communiqué (SAFECOM). The database fulfills the Aviation Mishap Information System (AMIS) requirements for aviation mishap reporting for the DOI agencies and the FS. Categories of reports include accidents, airspace, hazards, incidents, maintenance, mishap prevention, and kudos. The system uses the SAFECOM forms OAS-34or FS-5700-14to report any condition, observation, act, maintenance problem, or circumstance with personnel or aircraft that has the potential to cause an aviation-related mishap. The SAFECOM system isnot intended for initiating punitive actions. Submitting a SAFECOM isnot a substitute for "on-the-spot" correction(s) toa safety concern. SAFECOMs area tool used to identify, document, track, and correct safety-related issues. SAFECOMs donot replace the requirement for initiating an accident or incident report. Any individual (including vendors/cooperators) with knowledge ofan incident/hazard should complete a SAFECOM. The SAFECOM form, including attachments and pictures, should be entered directly onthe website, or contact the Office of Aviation Services (OAS) orFS representative listed onthe SAFECOM “About” page (https://www.safecom.gov/about). Electronic copies are automatically forwarded tothe national, regional, state, and unit aviation managers. The agency with operational control ofthe aircraft atthe time ofthe hazard/incident/accident is responsible for completing the SAFECOM and submitting it through agency channels. Aircraft Incidents/Accidents Notification tothe FSor OAS and DOI agency aviation safety managers is required for any aircraft mishap involving damage or injury. Use the hotline (888) 464-7427 (DOI Operations Center) orthe most expeditious means possible. Initiate the appropriate unit Aviation Mishap Response Plan. Unmanned Aircraft Systems UAS Incursion Reporting Protocol • Fire personnel should immediately notify the air tactical group supervisor (ATGS) if overhead, aircraft over the incident, theIC and dispatch. Dispatch should report all unauthorized unmanned aircraft system (UAS) or drone activity immediately via SAFECOM andto the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). Reporting key points: • Report UAS information (location, color, size, altitude, flight pattern), if known. • Dispatch centers should report incursions tothe nearest Air Route Traffic Control Center (ARTCC) or follow geographic area protocol. Policy • UAS fire operations shall be conducted under the provisions ofthe NWCG Standards for Fire Unmanned Aircraft Systems Operations, PMS 515. • When UAS are flown forFS/DOI work or benefit, FAA, FS, and DOI regulations apply.
• All aircraft (to include UAS) purchase, lease, or acquisition must follow department procurement policy and procedures. • All aircraft and pilots employed bythe FSor DOI agencies shall be credentialed in accordance with departmental policy. • UAS flights under FS operational control must adhere to USFS policy and regulations regarding their use. Guidance canbe found inFSM 5700 Zero Code and the USFS National Aviation Safety and Management Plan (https://www.fs.usda.gov/managing-land/fire/aviation/publications). • UAS flights under DOI operational control must adhere toDOI and agency-specific policy and regulations regarding their use. Guidance canbe found inthe Departmental Manual, parts 350-353, and Operational Procedures Memorandum 11 (https://www.doi.gov/aviation/library/opm). • UAS procured/owned/operated by cooperating agencies (State, local, and international) maybe utilized on federally managed fires when cooperative agreements arein place and the aircraft and pilot have been approved by letter nationally or regionally. • UAS flights conducted bynon-participatory entities (e.g., media) must adhere toFAA regulations. • A Special Government Interest (SGI) waiver is required for flights within a temporary flight restriction (TFR). SGI waiver requests shall be routed through the UAS Coordinator at208-387-5335. Personnel • Four UAS positions are listed inthe PMS 310-1: ○ Unmanned aircraft system pilot (UASP) ○ Unmanned aircraft system, data specialist (UASD) ○ Unmanned aircraft system, manager (UASM) ○ Unmanned aircraft system, module leader (UASL) Crew Composition • UAS operations are typically conducted under a crew (module) concept. • Typical module configuration: ○ Agency-operated systems (type 3or 4): UASP and UASD ○ Contract systems (type 1or 2): UASM and UASD ○ Span of control for multiple UAS operations onthe same incident canbe mitigated with UASL. Ordering • UAS personnel are ordered through established dispatch channels. • For specifics onhow to order UAS, see Interagency Fire UAS Ordering (https://uas.nifc.gov/uas-ordering). • Agency-owned, federally contracted, exclusive-use, and CWN UAS are national resources. Geographic areas utilizing them will make them available for fires ona priority basis. Operations • UAS flight crews utilize established procedures (e.g., fire traffic area) for coordinating flights with aerial supervision/on-scene aircraft. • Large UAS (typically type 1and 2) will launch and recover from a “launch and recovery zone” which should be designated on incident aviation planning maps. • Small (typically type 4) UAS are fireline portable, and flights will be conducted through established procedures. Key Points • UASis an effective tool for situational awareness and data collection. Determine the data objective before ordering the resource and flying the mission. • UAS ICS types are listed inthe NWCG Standards for Fire Unmanned Aircraft Systems Operations, PMS 515. • UAS training, aircraft, sensors, and capabilities are listed onthe Interagency Fire UAS Subcommittee website (see below). • Personally owned UASor model aircraft must notbe used by Federal agencies or their employees for interagency fire use. • Individuals who are determined to have interfered with wildland fire operations maybe subject to civil penalties and criminal prosecution. Additional Information For more information refer tothe Interagency Fire UAS Subcommittee webpage. • FAA – https://www.faa.gov/uas • DOI – https://www.doi.gov/aviation/uas • BLM – https://uas.nifc.gov/
• FS – https://www.fs.usda.gov/managing-land/fire/aviation/uas • Interagency UAS – https://uas.nifc.gov/ Airspace Coordination The Interagency Airspace Program isan aviation safety program designed to enhance aviation safety and reduce the risk ofa mid-air collision. The NWCG Standards for Airspace Coordination, PMS 520, provides direction and procedures for airspace coordination. Additional guidance maybe found inthe National Interagency Standards for Resource Mobilization and supplemented by local mobilization guides. • FS – Refer toFSH 5709.16, chapter 30for additional airspace information. An airspace coordinator (ASCO) should be ordered when incident aviation activity is widespread and involves a number of complex TFRs, complex airspace is involved, or difficult airspace conflict resolutions exist with various agencies. Airspace deconfliction is performed for both emergency and non-emergency aviation activities. Some BLM, BIA, State andFS units have memorandums of understanding (MOU) with local military airspace authorities for airspace coordination. Briefings from unit aviation managers/officers (UAM/UAO) are crucial to ensure that any local airspace information is coordinated before flight. All firefighting aircraft are required to have operative transponders and will usea national firefighting transponder code of 1255 when engaged in, or traveling to, firefighting operations (excluding ferry flights), unless given a discrete code byAir Traffic Control (ATC). Additional coordination information, including the agency member roster, canbe found onthe Interagency Airspace Subcommittee. Additional airspace coordination canbe found by contacting: • BLM – State aviation managers, national airspace program manager • NPS – Regional aviation managers • FWS – National aviation safety specialist • FS – National airspace program manager • BIA – Regional aviation managers Flight Request and Approval • NPS – Reference RM60, appendix 3and 4. • FS – Refer toFSH 5709.16, chapter 30for all flights. Point-to-point Flights A “point-to-point” flight isone that originates atone developed airport or permanent helibase and flies directly to another developed airport or permanent helibase with the sole purpose of transporting personnel or cargo (this term does not apply to flights with a scheduled air carrier ona seat-fare basis). These types of flights are often referred toas “administrative” flights and only require the aircraft and pilot tobe carded and approved for point-to-point flight. A point-to-point flight is conducted higher than 500 feet above ground level (AGL). Agency policy requires designating a flight manager for point-to-point flights transporting personnel. The flight manager isa Government employee that is responsible for coordinating, managing, and supervising flight operations. The flight manager isnot required tobe on board for most flights. For those flights that have multiple legs orare complex in nature, a flight manager should attend the entire flight. The flight manager will meet the qualification standard for the level of mission assigned asset forth inthe Interagency Aviation Training Guide (IAT). • BLM – Reference the BLM National Aviation Plan (https://www.nifc.gov/about-us/our- partners/blm/aviation/library), chapter 3. In addition, flights that require landing ina foreign country constitute international travel and are subject to policy contained in Instruction Memorandum No. 2022- 037, International Travel Guidance and Procedures. • NPS – Reference RM-60, appendix 3for agency specific policy. • FS – Refer toFSH 5709.16 chapter 30and the Forest Service Administrative Useof Aircraft Desk Reference. • BIA – Reference the BIA National Aviation Plan. Mission Flights Mission flights are defined as flights not meeting the definition of point-to-point flight. A mission flight requires work tobe performed inthe air (retardant or water delivery, fire reconnaissance, smokejumper delivery), or through a combination of ground and aerial work (e.g., delivery of personnel and/or cargo from helibases to helispots or
unimproved landing sites; rappelling or cargo let-down; short-haul; single-skid, toe-in, and hover exit/entry (STEP) procedures; hoist). • PPEis required for any fixed-wing mission flight conducted below 500 feet AGL. ○ DOI – Flight helmets may not be required for multi-engine airtanker crews, smokejumper pilots and leadplane/aerial supervision module (ASM) flight/aircrew members. Note: DOI requires a helmet for all special-use missions 500 feet and below unless a waiver is obtained per the ALSE Handbook. Refer to agency aviation policy to determine if ALSE waivers arein place for your specific mission. ○ FS – USFS does not require flight helmets for fixed-wing, special-use missions. • Reference ALSE Handbook for all PPE requirements for special-use flights. • All personnel will meet training and qualification standards required for the mission. • Agency FM radio capability is required for all mission flights. • All passengers must be authorized, and all personnel onboard must be essential tothe mission. ○ FS – A special-use-mission flight isany flight that isnot point-to-point. Special-use-mission flights require special pilot endorsements, flight evaluations, training, and/or specialized aircraft equipment. For all special-use-mission flights, all pilots and aircraft must be specifically approved in writing for that flight. Mission flights for fixed-wing aircraft include but are not limited tothe following: • Water or retardant application; • Parachute delivery of personnel or cargo; • Leadplane/ASM/airtanker operations; • Takeoff or landing requiring special techniques dueto hazardous terrain, obstacles, or surface conditions; and • Aerial supervision. Mission helicopter flights include but are not limited tothe following: • Flights conducted within 500 feet AGL; • Water or retardant application; • Helicopter coordinator and ATGS operations; • Aerial ignition activities; • External-load operations; • Rappelling; • Takeoff or landing requiring special techniques dueto hazardous terrain, obstacles, pinnacles, or surface conditions to include STEP – (single skid/toe-in/exit-entry procedure); • Free-fall cargo; • Fire reconnaissance; • Short-haul operations; and • Night helicopter operations. Low-Level Flight Operations The only fixed-wing aircraft missions authorized for low-level fire operations are: • Smokejumper/paracargo; • ASM and lead operations; and • Aerial dispensing of retardant, water enhancers and water. Operational Procedures • A high-level reconnaissance will be made prior tolow-level flight operations. • All flights below 500 feet will be contained tothe area of operation. Congested Area Flight Operations Airtankers can drop retardant in congested areas under DOI authority given in14 CFR Part 137. FS authority is granted under exemption 392, from 14CFR Part 91.119as referenced inFSH 5709.16, chapter 30. When such operations are necessary, they maybe authorized subject to these limitations: • Airtanker operations in congested areas maybe conducted atthe request ofthe city, rural fire department, county, State, or Federal fire suppression agency; • AnASM/leadplane is ordered to coordinate aerial operations; • The ATC facility responsible for the airspace is notified prior toor as soon as possible after the beginning ofthe operation; • A positive communication link must be established between the ASM or leadplane, airtanker pilot(s), and the responsible fire suppression agency official; and
• TheIC for the responsible fire agency or designee will advise the ASM/leadplane/airtanker that all non- essential people and movable property have been cleared prior to commencing retardant drops. Flight Following – All Aircraft Flight following is mandatory for all flights. Refer tothe National Interagency Standards for Resource Mobilization for specific direction. • Agency FM radio capability is required for all mission flights. • For mission flights, there are two types of agency flight following: Automated Flight Following (AFF) and radio check-in. AFFis the preferred method of agency flight following. Ifthe aircraft and flight following office have AFF capability, it shall be utilized. Periodic radio transmissions are acceptable when utilizing AFF. Reference the AFF procedures section ofthe National Interagency Standards for Resource Mobilization for more information. • All dispatch centers designated for fire support shall have the ability to monitor AFFas well asthe capability to transmit and receive “National Flight Following” and “Air Guard.” • IfAFF becomes inoperable, the aircraft will normally remain available for service, utilizing radio/voice system for flight following. Each occurrence must be evaluated individually and decided bythe COR/contracting officer (CO). • Helicopters conducting mission flights shall check-in prior toand immediately after each takeoff/landing per NWCG Standards for Helicopter Operations, PMS 510. Sterile Cockpit – All Aircraft Sterile cockpit rules apply within a5-mile radius ofthe airport. The flight crew will not perform radio or cockpit communication during that time that isnot directly related to safe flight ofthe aircraft from taxi to5 miles out and from 5 miles out until clearing the active runway. This would consist of reading checklists, communication with ATC, flight service stations, Unicom, or other aircraft with the intent of ensuring separation or complying with ATC requirements. Communications by passengers orair crew members canbe accomplished when the audio panels canbe isolated anddo not interfere with flight operations ofthe flight crew. Exception: When conducting firefighting missions within 5 miles ofan uncontrolled airport, maintain a sterile cockpit until departing the traffic pattern and reaching final altitude. Monitor common traffic advisory frequency (CTAF) frequency if feasible while engaged in firefighting activities. Monitor CTAF as soon as practical upon leaving the fire and returning tothe uncontrolled airport. When conducting firefighting missions within class B, C, orD airspace, notify dispatch that ATC communications will have priority over dispatch communications. Interagency Interim Flight and Duty Limitations/Aviation Stand Downs Aviation stand downs area means to find time, inan otherwise demanding flight schedule, to reflect on core aviation safety values. In this context, aviation stand downs refer toan administrative decision to keep tactical aviation resources onthe ground through allor part of their normal duty dayor days. Interim flight and duty limitations area method to manage pilot and crew fatigue by reducing the length ofthe duty dayor increasing the number of days offin the normal duty day cycle. During extended periods of high flight activity, fatigue must be mitigated by fire and aviation managers. Aviation stand downs and interim flight and duty day limitations canbe implemented atthe geographic area or national level. In either case, the procedure for implementation isthe same. Requests for implementation of flight and duty limitations, or proposed stand down parameters, will be made through the national aviation office through which it originated. Decisions and procedures for implementation will be made ona coordinated, interagency basis, involving the Geographic Area Coordination Center (GACC), NICC, and national aviation representatives atthe National Interagency Fire Center (NIFC) and aviation contracting officers. Details ofthe proposal will be formalized and coordinated with other affected agencies and implemented through the National Multi-Agency Coordinating Group (NMAC). Interim Flight and Duty Limitations Implementation What isthe Intent? Interim flight and duty limitations area method to manage pilot and crew fatigue by reducing the length ofthe duty day, reducing flight hours, or increasing the number of days offin the normal duty day cycle. Decisions and procedures for implementation will be made ona coordinated, interagency basis, involving the Geographic Area Coordination Center (GACC), the National Interagency Coordination Center (NICC), national
aviation representatives atthe National Interagency Fire Center (NIFC), National Interagency Aviation Committee (NIAC), and aviation contracting officers. Details ofthe proposal will be formalized and coordinated with other affected agencies and implemented through the National Multi-agency Coordinating Group (NMAC). To Whom Dothe Limitations Apply? The flight and/or duty limitations apply to contractor personnel supporting flight operations. Contractor Personnel – Examples of eligible contractor personnel would include pilot, maintenance crews, and fuel truck drivers. Fora comprehensive list of eligible contractor personnel, please refer to minimum and maximum crew staffing within the applicable contract. Flight and Duty Limitations Evaluation Criteria and Information Interim flight and duty limitations are written and implemented to mitigate cumulative organizational fatigue andto increase safety margins in advance. Agency leaders, employees, and aviation managers should usea proactive approach to implementation. Well rested and focused flight crews, maintenance personnel, fuel truck drivers, and aircrew members, are essential to safe, effective, and efficient aviation operations. Many factors maybe considered, and tradeoffs are recognized. Implementation of Phase 2and Phase 3 Interim Flight and Duty Limitations may impact Initial Attack capacity dueto staffing challenges. Every effort should be made bythe NICC, geographic areas (GAs), NMAC, and Agency program managers to mitigate these impacts without compromising fatigue management. Below are some criteria that maybe used to recommend implementation ofthe phases. The below criteria are not all inclusive and other criteria, conditions, or factors maybe used through a doctrinal approach. • Phase 1is considered standard flight and duty limitation required bythe Federal Aviation Administration and agency policies. • Phase 2 Interim Flight and Duty Limitations should be considered for any ofthe below conditions: ○ Moderate to high regional or national preparedness levels. Occasional (3or more per week) reports of36/6 challenges in2 or more GAs. ○ Predicted continuation of high tempo aviation operations. ○ Increasing trend of Incidents, Incidents with Potential, or Accidents. • Phase 3 Interim Flight and Duty Limitation should be considered for any ofthe below conditions: ○ High regional or national preparedness levels. ○ Frequent (5or more per week) reports of36/6 challenges in multiple (3or more) GAs. ○ Predicted continuation of high tempo aviation operations. Phase 1 – Standard Flight and Duty Limitations (Reference Applicable Contract for Contractor Personnel Duty Limitations) Itis the responsibility of every aviation manager to monitor and evaluate fatigue. Any decision to shorten duty days or grant additional days off needs tobe approved bythe applicable contracting officer. Phase 2 – Interim Duty Limitations When Phase 2is activated, pilots and other contract personnel shall adhere tothe day-off limitations prescribed in phase 1and the duty and flight limitations defined under Phase 2. The standard duty day shall be decreased by2 hours for each contract personnel duty day requirement as outlined inthe contract, and the flight crew shall flyno more than 7 hours inan operational period. Ifthe prescribed duty dayor 7 hours of flight time are exceeded, dueto threats to: life, property, infrastructure, orno relief resources are available, an additional hour of rest will be recorded during the next rest cycle and documented via the SAFECOM system. Double crews (2 complete flight crews assigned toan aircraft), augmented flight crews (an additional pilot-in- command assigned toan aircraft), and aircraft crews that work a rotating schedule (i.e., 2 days on, 1day off, 7 days on, 7 days off, or12 days on, 12 days off, or14 days assigned and7 days unassigned) maybe exempted from Phase 2 limitations upon verification that their scheduling and duty cycles meet or exceed the provisions of Phase 2 limitations. Phase 3 – Interim Duty Limitations When Phase 3is activated, all approved contractor personnel shall adhere tothe flight and duty limitations prescribed in Phase 2and the day off limitations defined under Phase 3. Each contract crew member shall be given an additional day off within a14-day period. Crews ona 12-and-2 schedule shall have 3 consecutive days off (11-and-3). Flight crews on6-and-1 schedules shall work an alternating weekly schedule of5 days on, 2 days off, then 6 days onand one day off. Any other approved schedule exceeds the additional day off requirement.
Understanding that not all geographic areas are engaged at this high level of activity, exceptions maybe authorized by regional or state aviation managers in coordination with national aviation management ona geographic or single resource basis. Aircraft fixed daily rates and special rates, when applicable, shall continue to accrue during the extra day off. If requested bythe government, contractors may provide additional approved contractor personnel to utilize their aircraft. All costs associated with providing the additional crew will be paid forby the government atthe applicable additional crew member rate in accordance with the contract. Process to implement Interim Flight and Duty Limitations: Geographic Area: 1. Interagency aviation managers monitor and evaluate conditions to initiate. 2. Consult with national aviation program managers once conditions are present or predicted to occur. 3. GA aviation managers meet and confirm recommendations. 4. GA coordinating group decides to implement and issues guidance. NMAC: 1. National aviation managers monitor and evaluate conditions to initiate nationally. 2. National aviation managers will consult GA aviation managers. 3. NMAC aviation liaisons will draft NMAC letter. 4. NMAC Chair will issue letter and guidance. Aviation Assets Typical agency aviation assets include helitack, rappel, short-haul, aerial supervision (ATGS), helicopter coordinator (HLCO), leadplane, aerial supervision module (ASM), large (multi-engine) airtankers (LAT), very large airtankers (VLAT), single engine airtankers (SEAT), scoopers, and smokejumpers. • BLM – All BLM-acquired aircraft (exclusive-use, on-call, and CWN) are available to move to areas of greatest BLM need, thereby maximizing efficiency and effectiveness. Specific authorities and responsibilities for field/state and national offices are outlined earlier in this chapter. Offices are expected to adhere to procedures established inthe BLM National Aviation Plan for both acquisition and use reporting. • BLM – Awaiting a resource order should notbe allowed to affect the response time for initial attack mobilization. Initial attack aircraft maybe launched tonew incidents with just the location, bearing, distance, and flight following frequency. All other pertinent information will be provided to aircrews while en route. See the BLM National Aviation Plan, 3.17.1, for additional information. • NPS – All NPS fire-funded aircraft (fleet, exclusive-use, on-call and CWN) are available to move to areas of greatest NPS need, thereby maximizing efficiency and effectiveness. Specific authorities and responsibilities for park, regional, and national offices are outlined earlier in this chapter. • FS – AllFS aircraft (agency-owned, exclusive-use, leased and CWN) are available to move to areas of greatest agency need, thereby maximizing efficiency and effectiveness. FS units are expected to adhere to procedures established in policy for acquisition and use reporting. • BIA – All BIA-acquired aircraft (exclusive-use, on-call, and CWN) are available to move to areas of greatest BIA need, thereby maximizing efficiency and effectiveness. Specific authorities and responsibilities for regional/agencies and national offices are outlined inthe National Aviation Plan for both acquisition and use reporting. The BIA Sensor Enhanced Air Attack aircraft personnel will work with GACCs and BIA Aviation Branch Office for coordination, movement, and ordering of such resources. Helitack Helitack crews perform suppression and support operations to accomplish fire and resource management objectives. Organization – Crew Size • BLM – The baseline staffing fora BLM exclusive-use type 3 helicopter is11 personnel. The baseline staffing fora BLM exclusive-use type 2 helicopter is13 personnel. The baseline staffing fora BLM exclusive-use type 1 helicopter is24 personnel. All BLM exclusive-use crews will consist ofkey positions, including supervisor, assistant, squad boss, and crew members. Recommended staffing levels for BLM exclusive-use helitack crews is outlined inthe BLM Fire 0456 Series User Guide, https://doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/blm-fa/SitePages/BLM- 0456-Series-Toolbox.aspx. BLM states may establish larger crew size and standards for their exclusive-use helicopter crews based on program need. Any increase in crew size will be documented inthe respective state aviation plan. BLM helicopters operated in Alaska need only be staffed with a qualified helicopter manager (HMGB).
• NPS – Helicopter exclusive-use modules will consist ofa minimum of eight fire-funded personnel. The NPS regions may establish larger crew size and standards for their exclusive-use helicopter crews based onthe need foran all-hazards component (fire, search and rescue [SAR], law enforcement, and emergency medical technician (EMT). Exception to minimum helicopter crew staffing standards must be approved bythe National Aviation Office. NPS helicopters operated in Alaska need only be staffed with a qualified HMGB. • FS – Exclusive-use helitack crew sizes will satisfy the FSM 5700, chapter 30, Helicopter Minimum Staffing requirements. At such time national crew size standards are established, the applicable national standard must be satisfied. Any deviation from the standard and the reason for the deviation must be found acceptable tothe Rotor Wing Branch Chief. Experience requirements for exclusive-use helicopter positions are listed in FSFAQG, chapter 4. • BIA – For exclusive use helitack crew size standards, see the NAP, appendices, and Exclusive Use Helicopter Module Position Standards. On-call helitack and all helicopter personnel responsibilities are outlined inthe NWCG Standards for Helicopter Operations, PMS 510. All helitack training and currency requirements are contained inthe PMS 310-1. Each region hosting exclusive-use/on-call helicopters is responsible for providing essential management, overhead, equipment, facilities, and the resources necessary to fully support the helitack crew. Host regions are encouraged to increase helitack crew size minimum requirements to enhance operational efficiency and effectiveness. All exclusive use helicopter programs are required touse the OPM- approved GS-0456 series organizational chart. The Aviation Branch Office recommends the11 crew size organizational chart foran exclusive use type 3 helicopter program. Minimum daily operational staffing levels will comply with PMS 510 standards. Exclusive Use Minimum ○ Type 3 helicopters – 10 helitack personnel ○ Type 2 helicopters – 12 helitack personnel Operational Procedures The NWCG Standards for Helicopter Operations, PMS 510 is policy for helicopter operations. Helibase All helibases with twoor more helicopters used for fire operations will have a helibase manager (HEBM) assigned and follow standards outlined inthe NWCG Standards for Helicopter Operations, PMS 510. Communication The helitack crew standard isone handheld, programmable, multi-channel FM radio per every two crew persons, and one multi-channel, VHF-AM, programmable radio inthe primary helitack crew (chase) truck. Each helitack crew (chase) vehicle will have a programmable VHF-FM mobile radio. Each permanent helibase will have a permanent programmable FM radio base station and should be provided aVHF-AM base station radio. Transportation Dedicated vehicles with adequate storage and security will be provided for helitack crews. The required gross vehicle weight (GVW) ofthe vehicle will be dependent upon the volume of equipment carried onthe truck and the number of helitack crewmembers assigned tothe crew. • BIA – Minimum vehicle configuration foran 11 person crew will consist ofone class-661 helitack support vehicle and one class-156or class-166 vehicle, A choice of additional vehicle(s) funded through the region canbe obtained to ensure adequate space for helitack module. Training and Experience Requirements All helitack members will meet fire qualifications as prescribed bythe PMS 310-1and their agency manual requirements. The following chart establishes experience and training requirements forFS, NPS, FWS, and BIA exclusive-use, fire helicopter crew positions. • BLM – Follows the guidance put forth in chapter 2. • NPS – Follows policy established inthe current version ofthe NPS National Program Staffing Guide. • BIA – Follows the guidance put forth inthe National Aviation Plan regarding fire helicopter position standards. Non-exclusive-use helicopter crewmembers (HECM) and HMGBs should also meet the following currency requirements. Note: The Interagency Aviation Training Guide (https://www.iat.gov/docs/IAT_Guide.pdf) states additional aviation training requirements (“A” courses).
Exclusive-Use Fire Helicopter Position Prerequisites Position1 Minimum Prerequisite Experience2 Minimum Required Training3 Currency Requirements Fire Helicopter Crew Supervisor One season4 asan assistant fire helicopter crew supervisor; IC, type 4 (ICT4), HMGB, HEBM RT-3725 RT-130 Assistant Fire Helicopter Crew Supervisor One season asa fire helicopter squad boss, ICT4, HMGB, HEBM trainee ICS-200, S-215, S-219, S-260, S-270RT-3725 RT-130 Fire Helicopter Squad Boss One season asa fire HECM, FFT1; IC, type 5 (ICT5) S-211, S-212RT-130 Fire Helicopter Crewmember One season asa FFT2, HECM position task book S-271RT-1301 All exclusive-use fire helicopter positions require an arduous fitness rating. 2 Minimum experience and qualifications required prior to performing inthe exclusive-use position. Each level must have met the experience and qualification requirements ofthe previous level(s). 3 Minimum training required to perform inthe position. Each level must have met the training requirements ofthe previous level(s). 4A “season” is continuous employment ina primary wildland fire position fora period of90 days or more. 5 After completing S-372, must attend Interagency Helicopter Manager Workshop (RT-372) within three years and every three years thereafter. Note: Exceptions tothe above position standards and staffing levels maybe granted ona case-by-case basis bythe BLM National Aviation Office, NPS regional office, FWS regional office, orFS regional office as appropriate. • Some positions maybe designated asCOR/Alternate-COR. Ifso, see individual agency COR training and currency requirements. • Fire HMGBs are fully qualified to perform all the duties associated with a resource helicopter manager. Helicopter Rappel and Cargo Let-Down BLM/NPS/BIA rappel and cargo let-down operations will follow the Interagency Helicopter Rappel Guide (IHRG). FS rappel programs will follow the National Rappel Operations Guide (NROG). Any exemption tothe identified guides must be requested bythe program through the state/region for approval bythe National Aviation Office (BLM/NPS/BIA), or Director of Fire and Aviation (FS). • BLM – BLM personnel involved inan interagency rappel program must have SFMO approval. • NPS/BIA – Approval is required bythe national office. • FS – Approval is required bythe national office. All rappel and cargo let-down operations will follow the IHRG, as policy. Any exemption tothe guide must be requested bythe program through the state/region for approval bythe National Aviation Office (BLM/NPS), or Director of Fire and Aviation (FS). Single-Skid, Toe-In, and Hover Exit/Entry (STEP) STEP missions may include insertion/extraction of personnel (firefighters, medical technicians, or rescuers) in support of operations and medical incidents, such as initial attack, large fire support, helispot construction, repeater missions, in areas where a ground-based approach or evacuation would expose rescuers, firefighters, and injured orill personnel to greater risk. Any STEP program must be approved bythe appropriate agency national office. • BLM – BLM STEP protocols are outlined inthe BLM National Aviation Plan. • NPS – NPS STEP protocols are outlined inthe NPSRM-60. Short-haul for Wildland Fire Any short-haul for wildland fire program must be approved bythe appropriate agency national office. • NPS – Helicopter Short-Haul Operations Plan. Short-haul To transport oneor more persons suspended beneath a helicopter. Short-haul includes insertion or extraction of firefighters, medical technicians or rescuers for suppression operations and medical rescues. Missions may include extraction of personnel from areas where a ground-based approach or evacuation would expose rescuers, firefighters, injured orill personnel to greater risk. All short-haul programs must be approved bythe appropriate agency national headquarters. • NPS/FS/BIA – National office approval is required. All short-haul operations will comply with the following policy:
• NPS – Helicopter Short-Haul Operations Plan. • FS – Forest Service Standards for Short-Haul Operations. Exemptions tothe policy must be requested bythe program through the regional office for approval bythe National Aviation Office (NPS) or Director of Fire and Aviation (FS). Aerial Ignition The NWCG Standards for Aerial Ignition, PMS 501, is policy for all aerial ignition activities. Fire Chemical Avoidance Areas See chapter 12, Suppression Chemicals and Delivery Systems, for guidance. Aerial Supervision Principles for ATGS, HLCO, ASM, and Leadplane The response speed of aerial supervision resources contributes greatly to established aggressive initial attack doctrine and should be utilized accordingly. Exclusive-use (agency-owned or contracted) air tactical group supervisor (ATGS) and helicopter coordinator (HLCO) resources are geographic area coordination center (GACC) shared resources. These resources are part ofa national response framework and are located at bases that provide the best strategic advantage for incident response within their zone in direct support ofthe airtanker and helicopter fleets. GACCs coordinate with their agencies to ensure response capabilities are commensurate to environmental conditions and provide support to NICC for national priorities. Agency program managers (national/regional) work with GACCs to provide expertise and make recommendations that support fire preparedness and suppression objectives for their agency and when available, their cooperators. Aerial supervision resources will be dispatched when available to initial-/extended-attack incidents in order to enhance safety, effectiveness, and efficiency of aerial/ground operations. The objective isto minimize the instances of airtankers and helicopters operating inthe fire traffic area (FTA) without aerial supervision. In accordance with NWCG Standards for Aerial Supervision, PMS 505, when aerial supervision resources areco- located with fixed-wing aircraft, they will be dispatched together unless the required aerial supervision is currently on scene ofthe incident oris being dispatched from another location. Examples of appropriate aerial supervision can include ATGS, ASM, and/or leadplane. Incidents with three or more aircraft flying missions atthe same time must have aerial supervision inthe form of ATGS, ASM/leadplane or HLCO ordered bythe unit maintaining operational control (operations maybe continued while the aerial supervisor isen route tothe incident or operations canbe continued ifthe resource isnot available and assigned resources are notified). During times of aerial supervision absence, aircraft shall coordinate with each other to implement tasks and objectives as prioritized bythe official in charge (i.e., ICor operations). A qualified smokejumper spotter (senior smokejumper in charge of smokejumper missions), rappel spotter, or short-haul spotter may coordinate their respected operations with on-scene aircraft over a fire until qualified aerial supervision arrives. See NWCG Standards for Aerial Supervision, PMS 505, page 34, table 1, for incident aerial supervision requirements. Operational Procedures and Policy The NWCG Standards for Aerial Supervision, PMS 505, provides operational procedures and forms for all aerial supervision resources. The NWCG Standards for Wildland Fire Position Qualifications, PMS 310-1, provides training, qualification, and currency standards. The NWCG Standards for Aerial Supervision, PMS 505, contains additional requirements andis policy for the BLM, NPS, FWS, FSand BIA. Air Tactical Group Supervisor The ATGS coordinates incident airspace and manages incident air traffic. The ATGS isan airborne firefighter who coordinates, assigns, and evaluates the use of aerial resources in support of incident objectives. Specific duties and responsibilities are outlined inthe NWCG Standards for Aerial Supervision, PMS 505. Program Management The air attack program is managed atthe national level by agency program managers. The National Interagency Aviation Committee (NIAC) provides guidance through the Interagency Aerial Supervision Subcommittee (IASS), which authorizes an agency program manager/ATGS GACC representative to provide operational and programmatic oversight atthe geographic area level.
Training Classroom training is completed per the PMS 310-1. Field (flight) training assignments are coordinated and prioritized bythe geographic area training representatives and agency program manager/ATGS GACC representatives. National interagency ATGS training aircraft have been identified and are utilized for the sole purpose of ATGS flight training. Operational Considerations • Ground resources will maintain consistent communication on assigned airto ground frequencies with aerial supervision to maximize the safety, effectiveness, and efficiency of aerial operations. • Relief aerial supervision should be ordered for sustained operations to ensure continuous coverage over an incident. • Personnel who are performing aerial reconnaissance and detection will not perform aerial supervision duties unless they are fully qualified asan ATGS. • ATGS aircraft must meet the aircraft/avionics typing requirements listed inthe NWCG Standards for Aerial Supervision, PMS 505, and the pilot must be carded to perform the air tactical mission. Rotor-wing pilots are not required tobe carded for air tactical missions. Aerial Supervision Module and Leadplane The aerial supervision module (ASM) and leadplane (LP) are national shared resources. The ASM is crewed with both a leadplane pilot (LPIL) andan air tactical supervisor (AITS). These individuals are specifically trained to operate together asa team. The resource is primarily designed for providing both functions (leadplane pilot and ATGS) simultaneously from the same aircraft but can also provide single-role service. The leadplane is staffed with a single pilot and provides coordination with fixed-wing airtankers and water scooping aircraft. Operational Considerations Any operation that limits the national resource availability must be approved bythe agency program manager. Aerial or incident complexity and environmental considerations will dictate when the ASM ceases low-level operations. The ASM flight crew has the responsibility to determine when the complexity level ofthe incident exceeds the capability to perform both ATGS and leadplane functions from one aircraft. The crew will request additional supervision resources or modify the operation to maintain mission safety and efficiency. Policy Only those individuals authorized bythe National Aviation Office (BLM)/FS-standardization pilot/State aviation official and approved bythe regional aviation officer/BLM state aviation manager/State aviation official will be certified to function asan AITS. Aerial Supervision Module Program Training and Qualifications Training and qualification requirements for ASM crewmembers are defined inthe NWCG Standards for Aerial Supervision, PMS 505. Aerial Supervision Coordination National coordination and management ofASM andLP resources are required to ensure national coverage and capability. Agency aerial supervision/flight operation program managers (national/regional) will work with the NICC and GACCs to ensure staffing, aircraft readiness, and availability. Reconnaissance or Patrol Flights The purpose of aerial reconnaissance or detection flights isto locate and relay fire information to management. In addition to detecting, mapping, and providing fire sizeup, this resource maybe utilized to provide ground resources with intelligence on fire behavior, tothe IC when appropriate, and describe access routes into and out of fire areas for responding units. Only qualified aerial supervisors (ATGS, AITS, HLCO and LPIL) are authorized to coordinate incident airspace operations and give direction to aviation assets. Flights with a “reconnaissance, detection, or patrol” designation should communicate with tactical aircraft only to announce location, altitude andto relay their departure direction and altitude from the incident. Airtankers Federally contracted airtankers are national resources. Geographic areas administering these aircraft will make them available for initial attack and extended-attack fires ona priority basis regardless of GACC boundaries. Early activation for large fire support can have a significant effect onthe resource availability late inthe day. NICC must
be included in this discussion. The rationale for use of airtankers prior to normal start times for large fire support must include obtainable incident objectives in support of ground resources. Host GACCs will check with NICC prior to releasing flight crews on LATs, VLATs and scoopers for the day when those resources are not being used within the host area and could be utilized elsewhere for emerging or ongoing fire activity. LATs primarily are initial attack capable without leadplane/ASM supervision. VLATs require leadplane/ASM supervision tobe on scene prior to arriving onthe fire. The National Interagency Standards for Resource Mobilization, chapter 50, “Airtankers,” contains additional direction regarding staffing and maintenance of support functions to mobilize national resources. For aviation safety and policy concerning wildland fire chemicals see chapter 12, “Suppression Chemicals and Delivery Systems.” Federal airtankers are owned and operated by commercial vendors. Some States may contract for commercially owned airtankers, own airtankers, or order airtankers through compacts—either State-to-State or State-to-Canadian- province. The management of airtankers is governed by: • BLM – The requirements ofthe DM, BLM NAP, and BLM Manual 9400. • FS – Airtankers operate in accordance with 14CFR part 137, specific contracts, Grants of Exemption; Forest Service Manual (5700) and Handbook (5709.16); and the Forest Service Standards for Airtanker Operations. • BIA – The requirements ofthe DMand BIA NAP. Airtanker Types Airtankers are typed (https://www.nwcg.gov/publications/pms200) according to their load capacity: • Very large airtankers – 6,000 gallons or more • Type 1 – 3,000to 5,999 gallons • Type 2 – 1,800to 2,999 gallons • Type 3 – 800to 1,799 gallons • Type 4 – upto 799 gallons Very Large Airtankers Very Large Airtankers (VLATs) have some unique operational considerations including low-level supervision, terrain, airtanker base ramp operations and operations inthe fire traffic area (FTA). • Leadplane/ASM supervision will beon scene prior to arriving onthe fire. • Aerial supervision (leadplane orASM) is required by contract and interagency policy for VLATs while dropping retardant. • Aerial supervisors will have the technical expertise to determine ifthe VLAT isthe right tool for the terrain and objectives. • VLATs minimum drop height is250 feet above the ground or canopy cover whichever is higher. Generally, drop heights should increase when using higher coverage levels. • VLATs require considerably more space and clearance from other aircraft within the FTA and more time toset upfor drops. • Airtanker bases approved for VLATs are listed inthe NWCG Airtanker Base Directory. State of Alaska Airtankers Airtankers under contract tothe State of Alaska maybe mobilized tothe lower 48as approved cooperator aircraft. Prior to mobilization tothe lower 48, ordering agencies should confirm that current cooperator letters arein place for the requested aircraft and pilots permitting operations inthe lower 48 States. • FS – Convair 580 airtankers are not approved for use on Forest-Service-protected lands. International Airtankers and Water Scoopers International airtankers and scoopers canbe activated through the agreements, NIFC/other fire coordination center, or authority or through compacts (State-to-Canadian province). Other international airtankers and water scoopers may operate individually like U.S. airtankers and scoopers. • NIFC-ordered, Canadian/international aircraft – Aircraft ordered through the NIFC agreement with the foreign country maybe used on Federal lands ifthe aircraft have been inspected and approved byFS letter. • Compact-ordered aircraft – Aircraft and flight crews ordered through State-to-Canadian-province compacts will be considered non-federally approved cooperator aircraft unless they have been previously inspected and approved bythe FS/DOI.
The standard operating procedure for the Canadian or international airtankers and water scoopers isas follows: • Ifthe pilot isnot initial attack rated, the Canadian or international airtankers or water scoopers must be supervised bya Canadian Bird Dogor USASM/leadplane or ATGS. • Canadian Bird Dogs may provide low-level target identification runs (“show me” pass) for either Canadian, international orUS-contracted airtankers. • Canadian Bird Dogs are not authorized to “lead” US-federally-contracted airtankers or other international airtankers. • Canadian Bird Dogs can perform the functions ofan ATGS once approved bythe US ordering agency. • USASM/leadplanes are authorized to “lead” Canadian and international airtankers. • Canadian airtankers and water scoopers typically operate asa “group” with Canadian Bird Dogs as part of their operational model. • Canadian Bird Dogs have a Canadian air attack officer (AAO) on board and function similar toa USASM. Airtanker Rotation The Federal, national airtanker fleet includes amix of exclusive-use, CWN/on-call type 1and type 2 LATs, VLATs, or SEATs. To ensure consistent utilization, rotation, and management ofthe national airtanker fleet, the following is interagency direction for the management of airtanker rotation and supplements direction contained in NWCG Standards for Airtanker Base Operations (SABO), PMS 508. All LATs, VLATs and SEATs (including federally approved cooperator and Canadian and other international airtankers) operating from the same base shall be dispatched in rotation based onthe type of airtanker requested ona first-in/first-out basis regardless of contract type (exclusive-use, CWN/on-call or Forest-Service-owned) orthe location ofthe incident. First in/first out also applies to airtankers that are requested fora load/return. When an incident requires multiple loads of retardant, aerial supervisors/ICs will notify the appropriate dispatch center ofthe need for additional retardant and any operational retardant delivery requirements. To ensure timely and effective retardant delivery, dispatch will order the next available airtanker in rotation ifan airtanker that meets the requirement ofthe request is available and located atthe load and return airtanker base. Exceptions 1. Airtankers that donot have an initial-attack-rated pilot in command will notbe dispatched toa fire unless a leadplane orASM ison scene upon the arrival ofthe airtanker. 2. ICs/aerial supervision requests a specific type of resource (e.g., VLAT, LAT, or SEAT). 3. On-scene aerial supervision determines that the use ofa specific make/model airtanker isnot effective based on factors, such as risk, maneuverability in terrain, and/or effectiveness. 4. The next airtanker in rotation hasan operating restriction atthe base where the airtanker is being assigned. Operating restrictions may include fuel and retardant availability, airtanker base or airport restrictions, significant downloading of fuel or retardant based on performance, daylight remaining, or distance tothe incident isnot considered effective. 5. Repositioning ofan airtanker closer to where their maintenance crews or supplies are available. (NICC will facilitate in coordination with the GACC. 6. A benefit tothe Government would be realized by changing the rotation. This will be facilitated bythe GACC or NICC with consideration to days off, mission requirements, and/or anticipated need. 7. Airtankers are returning after day(s) off. Upon returning to availability from days off, these airtankers will beat the end ofthe rotation atthe airtanker base. Airtankers working seven-day schedule retains their position inthe rotation. 8. MAFFS; NICC-ordered, State cooperators; and NICC-ordered, international airtankers will begin rotation at that base after the contracted airtanker(s) atthe beginning of each day. 9. Water scoopers will notbe included in airtanker base rotations. Rotation of State Airtankers Rotation of State resources on State incidents ata State airtanker base is established by their agency. In cases where federally approved, State airtankers are operated in conjunction with federally contracted airtankers onan incident primarily on Federal lands, the State airtankers are added tothe rotation after the Federal airtankers atthe beginning of each day. Additional Information FS-/DOI-contracted airtankers, when assigned to incidents managed by other agencies or State cooperators remain under the direction ofthe contracting agency. FS-/DOI-contracted airtankers are bound only by their contract and will be treated fairly and equitability during their assignment with other Federal or State agencies.
Airtanker Payloads Loading type 2, type 1or VLAT airtankers with water or dropping water operationally shall not occur unless theFS National Airtanker Program Manager has been notified. Useof water operationally from these airtankers will require the following prior to notification: • Useof retardant is restricted bythe fire management plan (FMP) for the unit requesting the approval touse water. A copy ofthe section ofthe FMP restricting useof retardant shall be provided tothe Forest Service National Airtanker Program Manager with the notification. ○ Prior to ordering an airtanker, the receiving unit should request the appropriate water aerial dispensing aircraft, such asa water scooper or helicopter. During pre- or post-season fires, loading airtankers with water maybe necessary when the nearest airtanker base may not be operational and capable of loading retardant. Once an airtanker base is operational and can load retardant, useof water shall cease. Useof water enhancers (gels) is strictly prohibited in type 2, type 1or VLAT airtankers contracted bythe FS. Large and Very Large Airtanker Coordination National coordination and management ofFS-contracted airtankers and scoopers is required to ensure there is airtanker and scooper coverage, response, and capability nationwide. TheFS Airtanker Program Manager andFS Fixed-wing Coordinator coordinate and manage airtanker and scooper readiness and availability, capability, and response with vendors, national aviation staff, and NICC. Airtanker Base Operations Certain parameters for the operation of airtankers are agency specific. For dispatch procedures, limitations, and times, refer to geographic area mobilization guides and the NWCG Standards for Airtanker Base Operations, PMS 508. All permanent and temporary bases will have an airtanker base operations plan (ABOP), anda qualified ATBM prior to operations outof the airtanker base airport. All personnel conducting airtanker base operations shall review the SABO and have it available. ATBMs are authorized to manage SEATs. Both large airtankers as well as SEATs have applicable aircraft contracts that will be available for reference, as well asthe national long-term, fire-retardant contract. Regions, States, and GACCs shall coordinate airtanker base activation and closing dates with the appropriate agency airtanker base specialist to ensure national airtanker response and capability is maintained. • FS – National job codes for airtanker base early activation or late closing is available to support national response and capability. Loading Operations FS-contracted airtankers and modular airborne firefighting system (MAFFS) airtankers shall be loaded using a mass flow meter to measure the payload in pounds. Refer tothe Forest Service Standards for Airtanker Operations for more information. Airtanker Base Personnel There is identified training for the positions at airtanker bases. The PMS 310-1 lists required training for these positions. The ATBM provides supervision and coordination of airtanker base operations. The ATBM has ultimate authority and responsibility over all operations atthe airtanker base. The ATBM may report tothe local aviation manager and/or incident aviation manager. Startup/Cutoff Time for Multi-Engine Airtankers Refer tothe NWCG Standards for Aerial Supervision, PMS 505. Single Engine Airtankers Single Engine Airtanker Operations, Procedures, and Safety The NWCG Standards for Airtanker Base Operations, PMS 508, defines operating standards andis policy for both the DOI andFS. All permanent and temporary SEAT bases will have a SEAT base operating plan, anda qualified single engine airtanker manager (SEMG) or ATBM prior to operations outof the SEAT base airport.
Single Engine Airtanker Manager Position The SEMG duties and responsibilities are outlined inthe NWCG Standards for Airtanker Base Operations (SABO), PMS 508. The PMS 310-1lists required training for the SEMG position, ATBM position, and other base support positions. SEMGs may also refer tothe SABO for base support duties and responsibilities. The SEMG provides supervision and coordination of SEAT base operations and base support personnel. The SEMG may report tothe local aviation manager, incident aviation manager, or ATBM if applicable. SEMGs assist in ensuring adherence to contract regulations, safety and policy requirements, and fiscal accountability. Operational Procedures Using SEATs in conjunction with other aircraft over an incident is standard practice. Agency or geographical area mobilization guides may specify additional procedures and limitations. Depending on location, operator, and availability, SEATs can drop suppressants, water, or approved chemical retardants. Because ofthe load capacities ofthe SEATs (500to 800 gallons), quick turn-around times should bea prime consideration. SEAT operations at established airtanker bases or reload bases are authorized. All BLM andFS airtanker base operating plans will permit SEAT loading in conjunction with LATs. Water Scoopers Single Engine Water Scoopers Single engine water scoopers such asthe AT-802F are fixed-wing, turbo-prop aircraft with amphibious floats and are categorized asa type 4 water scooper. Units ordering single engine water scoopers will need to verify there isa qualified manager on-site. Single engine water scoopers may only be managed remotely for24 hours to allow time for assigned SEMG/ATBM or Amphibious Water Scooper Manager (AWSM) to relocate tothe aircraft’s operating location. Single engine scoopers engaged in delivering retardant will need to have an appropriate ATBM or SEMG on-site. Single engine scoopers delivering water enhancers will need to follow agency policy and contract as well as only delivering those products that are approved onthe QPL, andat the proper mix ratios. Refer tothe NWCG Standards for Water Scooping Operations (PMS 518). Multi Engine Water Scoopers FS-contracted, multi engine water scoopers are turbo-prop, amphibious aircraft that are ordered as type 3 multi- engine airtankers (Water Scooper) and are national resources. Geographic areas administering these aircraft will make them available for initial attack and extended attack fires ona priority basis. A qualified Amphibious Water Scooper Manager (AWSM) will need tobe ordered bythe unit requesting water scoopers and will need tobe on site to coordinate water scooper operations, logistics, contract administration, and water-body assessment. FS-contracted, multi-engine water scoopers, by contract, shall not use retardant, foam, or gels. Smokejumper Pilots The Interagency Smokejumper Pilot Operations Guide (ISPOG) serves as policy for smokejumper pilot qualifications, training, and operations. Helicopters Helicopter Types The minimum specifications for the typing of helicopters (https://www.nwcg.gov/publications/pms200) areby useful load, passenger seats, water or retardant carrying capability, and maximum gross weight. ICS Type Specifications for Helicopters Attributes Type 1 Type 2 Type 3 Useful load at59° Fat sea level 5,000 pounds 2,500 pounds 1,200 pounds Passenger seats 15or more 9-144-8 Retardant or water carrying capability 700 gallons 300 gallons 100 gallons Maximum gross takeoff/landing weight 12,501+ pounds 6,000-12,500 pounds upto 6,000 pounds The National Interagency Standards for Resource Mobilization, chapter 50, contains additional direction regarding staffing and maintenance support functions to mobilize national resources. For aviation safety and policy concerning wildland fire chemicals (water enhancers, retardants, and foams), reference the Wildland Fire Chemicals and Aerial
Delivery Systems website. Other helicopter information canbe found inthe NWCG Standards for Helicopter Operations, PMS 510. • FS – The use of fire chemicals mixed with on board injection or blending systems isnot permitted on Forest- Service-contracted aircraft. Water enhancers maybe mixed and loaded from ground-based equipment when demand mixed through a proportioner; or batch mixed tothe qualified mix ratio ina separate tank, then transferred into adip tank. Compliance with the Forest Service Qualified Product List (https://www.fs.usda.gov/rm/fire/wfcs/) to include qualified, required mix ratios, is mandatory. Military or National Guard Helicopters and Pilots The Military Use Handbook will be used when planning or conducting aviation operations involving regular military aircraft. Ordering military resources is done through NICC; National Guard resources are utilized through local or State memorandum of understanding (MOU). Modular Airborne Fire Fighting System (MAFFS) The MAFFS Operations Plan will be used when planning or conducting aviation operations involving MAFFS military aircraft. Ordering MAFFS is done through the NICC; MAFFS are utilized through a national agreement (see the National Interagency Standards for Resource Mobilization). Several States have the ability to activate MAFFS through separate agreements that donot require ordering through NICC. Cooperator Aircraft Cooperator-contracted aircraft also onan existing Federal contract with Federal aircraft and pilot cards maybe utilized on federally protected lands when cooperative agreements arein place and the aircraft have been approved by USDA Forest Service/DOI letter. Cooperator-contracted, exclusive-use aircraft noton an existing Federal contract maybe considered for approval ona case-by-case basis when cooperative agreements arein place. Approval will beby USDA Forest Service/DOI letter. Cooperator-owned/-operated aircraft maybe utilized on federally managed fires when cooperative agreements arein place and the aircraft have been approved byFS/DOI letter. Cooperator-owned/-operated aircraft meeting requirements ofthe NWCG Standards for Interagency Cooperator Type 2and Type 3 Helicopters, PMS 525-1, or other applicable NWCG standards maybe utilized on federally protected lands when cooperative agreements arein place and the aircraft have been approved byFS/DOI letter. All cooperator aircraft used on federally protected lands must be approved byFS/DOI letter. Utilization of approved, cooperator aircraft shall be limited based on49 United States Code §40125. • All approved cooperator aircraft used on federally managed fires shall be released when Federal aircraft become reasonably available. • The use of cooperator aircraft must involve a “significant and imminent threat to life or property” documented daily onthe Cooperator Aircraft Use Validation Worksheet (National Interagency Standards for Resource Mobilization, chapter 80 Forms) to document the justification for aircraft utilization. Non-Federally Approved Cooperator Aircraft Cooperator-contracted, exclusive use aircraft noton an existing Federal contract maybe considered for approval ona case-by- case basis when cooperative agreements arein place. The following conditions apply for non-federally approved aircraft: • No Federal employees are allowed to ride on board the aircraft. • No Federal employee maybe assigned toa position that exercises contractual control. • Federal personnel may load retardant at Federal airtanker bases, regardless of jurisdiction. • Federal personnel may provide aerial supervision (ATGS, ASM, HLCO, leadplane) under existing standard operating procedures and agreements. • The aircraft remains under State operational control regardless ofthe agency affiliation ofthe firefighters directing the aircraft onan incident with State jurisdiction. • The aircraft are approved to interact with Federal dispatch personnel as long asthe aircraft remains under the operational control ofthe State orfor safety reasons. Under emergency circumstances, where human life is immediately at risk by wildland fire on lands under Federal protection, a Federal line officer can approve the use ofnon-federally approved aircraft. This exemption must only take place when sufficient Federal firefighting aircraft are not readily available to meet the emergency need. Federal line officers are encouraged to consult with agency aviation management personnel toaid in decision-making.
Approving Federal line officer must document exemptions in accordance with agency guidance to include submitting a SAFECOM within 24 hours.
Chapter 17 Fuels Management Introduction The purpose ofthe fuels management programs within the Department ofthe Interior (DOI) and the Forest Service (FS) isto reduce hazardous fuels and risks to human communities and improve the health ofthe land by creating fire-resilient landscapes and restoring fire-adapted ecosystems. The DOI andFS, along with other Federal, State, Tribal, and local partners, will work to ensure effective fire management efforts are collectively planned and implemented. These efforts will be consistent with the direction provided in: • Review and Update ofthe 1995 Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy (January 2001) • Guidance for Implementation of Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy (February 13, 2009) Policy The Federal fire agencies use the NWCG Standards for Prescribed Fire Planning and Implementation, PMS 484, to manage prescribed fire activities. This guide provides standardized procedures specifically associated with the planning and implementation of prescribed fire. Fuels Management Policy, project planning and implementation priorities, and standards common toall agencies include: • Firefighter and public safety are the top priority. • Describe what is minimally acceptable for prescribed fire planning and implementation. Agencies may choose to provide more restrictive standards and policy direction but must adhere to these minimums. • Provide common language and unified direction or guidance for federal agency manuals, directive handbooks, and guidelines tobe issued as agency policy. • Develop single unit, multiple units, and programmatic plans where the intent isto ignite a unit or units with active perimeter control. • Plan for long-duration, landscape-scale prescribed fires, where the intent isto ignite portions ofthe unit and allow fire to move across the project area over time that may require supplemental information and analysis. • Ensure that risk management is incorporated into all prescribed fire planning and implementation. • Support safe, carefully planned, and cost-efficient prescribed fire operations. • Support useof prescribed fire to reduce wildfire risk to communities, municipal watersheds, and other values, andto benefit, protect, maintain, sustain, and enhance natural and cultural resources. • Support useof prescribed fire to restore natural ecological processes and functions, andto achieve land- management objectives. Some programmatic differences are identified inthe following agency-specific documentation and serve as agency- specific direction. • BLM – Reference BLM Fuels Management and Community Assistance Handbook 9214-1. • NPS – Refer toRM 18. • FWS – Refer to Fire Management Handbook, chapter 17. • FS – Refer toFSM 5140. • BIA – Refer to Bureau of Indian Affairs Fuels Management Program Business Rules Handbook, July 2008. Reporting Fuels Management Accomplishments The Interior Fuels and Post-fire Reporting System (IFPRS) isthe Department ofthe Interior national System of Record (SOR) for submitting estimated and completed fuels management actions. These actions include treatments and activities where the system tracks accomplishments ofthe fuels program asthe authoritative data. Data are used for reporting performance and accountability for all agencies inthe DOI. USDA FS fuels management accomplishments are entered into theFS Activity Tracking System (FACTS) asthe official system of record for tracking and reporting. Information on FACTS canbe found at https://fsweb.nrm.fs.fed.us/. Reporting Fuels Treatment Effectiveness Monitoring Anytime a wildfire starts inor interacts with a fuel treatment area, policy requires that all agencies document the outcome to examine whether the treatment had the desired effect of reduced fire behavior and/or provided opportunities to firefighters for effective management ofthe wildfire.
• BLM – Refer toH-9214-1. • NPS – Refer toRM 18. • FWS – Refer to Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) Fire Management Reporting Requirements and Timelines Memorandum, FMB202015 - Establishment ofa Fuels Management Three-Year Program of Work. • FS – Refer toFSM 5140. • BIA – Refer to memorandum Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) Fuels Treatment Effectiveness Final Guidance, 06/05/2013. Reporting Planned Fuels Treatments Burned ina Wildfire • BLM/NPS – Acres burned ina wildfire maybe reported in IFPRS asa “wildfire” treatment type ifthe following criteria have been met: ○ The area burned wasin a preexisting IFPRS treatment unit. ○ The National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) is complete. ○ The planned objectives associated with the treatment were accomplished. ○ Line/Fuels Manager approves the determination and notifies the State/Regional Fuels Program Manager to ensure reporting. • FWS – Acres burned ina wildfire may only be reported in IFPRS within these treatment categories: biological, chemical, mechanical, or planned ignition, and then with a “wildfire” treatment type only ifall the following conditions are met: ○ The area burned is preidentified (with polygon) within the three-year program of work. ○ The preidentified objectives associated with the treatment were accomplished. ○ Relevant pre-treatment compliance is complete. • FS – Acres burned from an unplanned natural ignition maybe reported as “fire use” accomplishment ifthe resulting fire effects meet objectives from theL/RMPor project-specific NEPA decision document. Human- caused wildfires may not be counted as accomplishment toward target regardless ofthe outcome. See “Reporting of Wildfire Acres That Meet Resource Management Objectives” section below for additional information. • BIA – Refer to Bureau of Indian Affairs Fuels Management Program Business Rules Handbook, July 2008, page 36. Reporting of Wildfire Acres That Meet Resource Management Objectives Acres burned ina wildfire that achieve resource management objectives as defined inL/RMPs and fire management plans (FMP) will be reported in IFPRS/FACTS. While strategies for managing individual wildfires are established through the fire management decision process, the identification of acres which achieved L/RMP/FMP objectives should be made after the fire is declared out, regardless ofthe fire management objective, strategy, or tactic used (e.g., even though a wildfire strategy maybe full suppression, the effects ofa wildfire on resources maybe beneficial). The determination of benefit must be based on land management objectives which are affected by fire severity, intensity, and other fire impacts. Post-fire impact, such as invasion of exotic species and the need for rehabilitation, should be considered in this determination. Ata minimum, acres reported in IFPRS/FACTS must meet the following criteria: • TheL/RMP/FMP supports attainment of resource benefit through useof fire; • An interdisciplinary approach is used to determine whether theL/RMP/FMP objectives were met; and • Line manager approves the determination. ○ BLM – Reporting will take place in IFPRS. ○ FWS/NPS – Reporting will take place in InFORM. ○ FS – Direction for reporting accomplishments from unplanned ignitions is found inthe Hazardous Fuels Reduction Treatments Tracking and Accomplishments Reporting Requirements document posted onthe FACTS support page. Prescribed Fire During Preparedness Levels 4and 5 Approval atthe regional or state office level is required prior to ignition of prescribed fires at national preparedness levels 4and 5. Approving officials should consider relative risks and opportunities as well as availability of local resources to implement without the need for additional outside resources that could add additional strain on resource availability nationally. To limit the potential for mixed messages when at Geographic Area Coordination Center (GACC) or national preparedness levels 4and 5, agencies should coordinate information on planned implementation of prescribed fires with interagency partners atthe local, Geographic Area Multi-agency Coordinating Group (GMAC) and National Multi-agency Coordinating Group (NMAC) levels.
• BLM – The state director or designee will approve prescribed fire at national or geographic area preparedness level 4or 5. • NPS – At geographic area preparedness level 4or 5, written concurrence from NPS regional fire management is required prior to implementing prescribed fires. At national preparedness level 4or 5, NPS regional fire management and NPS Chief, Branch of Wildland Fire written concurrence is required prior to implementing prescribed fires. A notification tothe regional director is required in both regional and national preparedness level scenarios andis the responsibility ofthe NPS regional fire management staff. Email isan acceptable method to satisfy concurrence requirements. • FWS – During geographic area preparedness level 4and 5, and national preparedness level 4, written concurrence from regional fire management must be obtained prior to implementing a prescribed fire. During national preparedness level 5, written concurrence from regional fire management and the Branch of Fire Management must be obtained prior to implementing a prescribed fire. Refer toFMH, chapter 17for additional information. • FS – The regional forester will approve or disapprove new prescribed fires or continue existing prescribed fire at national preparedness levels 4and 5or if National Fire Danger Rating System forecasted adjective rating is “extreme” for the county that the prescribed fire is located orany adjacent county. Reference FSM 5140. • BIA – At Geographic Planning Level 4and 5, the regional director will approve initiation or continuance ofall prescribed fires or wildland fire use plans and notify the Branch Chief Fire Use and Fuels of such action. At National Fire Preparedness Planning Level 5, the regional director will approve all initiation or continuance of prescribed fire or wildland fire use plans and obtain concurrence from the Branch Chief Fire Use and Fuels. The Branch Chief Fire Use and Fuels will coordinate with the BIA NMAC representative and Fire Director and provide a written response prior tothe planned initiation or continuance of action. Written concurrence is required to proceed. Federal Agencies Assistance Reference section VIof the Interagency Agreement for Wildland Fire Management among the Bureau of Land Management, Bureau of Indian Affairs, National Park Service, Fish and Wildlife Service ofthe United States Department ofThe Interior, and the Forest Service ofthe United States Department of Agriculture. Agencies will enter into separate agreements for personnel and other resources provided for planning and implementation of fuels management treatments and activities. This mayor may not result inan exchange of funds subject tothe applicable statutory authority used. • FS – USFS units will make every attempt to establish agreements in advance when planning to utilize resources from cooperating agencies to implement or respond as contingency resources for prescribed fire. However, for prescribed fire activities and exigent circumstances, where an agreement was not executed and funds were not obligated prior to commencing work, a ratification may not be necessary ifan approved agreement is executed and funds obligated onI-web within 30 calendar days ofthe start of work. See FSH 1509.11 chapter 10, Section 15.81. • BIA – Refer to Bureau of Indian Affairs Fuels Management Program Business Rules Handbook, July 2008, pages 23-24. Hazard Pay/Environmental Differential for Prescribed Fire Implementation Hazard pay will notbe paid for any prescribed fire. Under certain circumstances, (e.g., low-level flight operations), hazard pay, or environmental differential maybe warranted. Offices should contact their servicing personnel office with specific questions. Non-NWCG Agency Personnel Useon Prescribed Fire For information regarding useof non-National Wildfire Coordinating Group (NWCG) agency personnel on prescribed fires, see chapter 13. Useof Contractors for Prescribed Fire Implementation Agencies can contract to conduct allor part ofthe planning and implementation of prescribed fire operations and/orall or part of mechanical treatments for fuels management projects. Contractors must meet NWCG Standards for Wildland Fire Position Qualifications, PMS 310-1, qualification requirements and agency standards for specific skill positions for prescribed fire operations. Ifa contractor is actively involved in igniting, holding, or mopping upan agency prescribed fire, a contracting officer’s authorized representative (COR) or project inspector (PI) will beon site (exceptions canbe made for late stage mopup and patrol) to ensure that the prescribed fire objectives are being met and that the terms ofthe contract
are adhered to. The agency administrator and/or fire management officer (FMO) will determine the qualifications required for the agency representative (CORor PI). • BLM – Refer toH-9214-1, chapter 5-3, Contractor and Cooperator Prescribed Fire Plan Development and Implementation. • FWS – Refer to Fire Management Handbook, chapter 17, and 645 FW1 for fuels projects funded bythe Partners for Fish and Wildlife Program and Coastal Program. • FS – Contractors must meet requirements for any specific skill positions for prescribed fire operations as described inPMS 310-1or FSH 5109.17for positions not found inthe PMS 310-1 (e.g., RXB3). Reference FSM 5140. • BIA – Refer to Bureau of Indian Affairs Fuels Management Program Business Rules Handbook, July 2008, page 22. Useof Administratively Determined Pay Plan for Prescribed Fire Administratively Determined workers maybe used in support of prescribed fire under specific circumstances. Refer tothe appropriate DOIor FS Administratively Determined (AD) Pay Plan for Emergency Workers (Casuals) for information regarding the use of emergency workers for prescribed fire. Administratively Determined pay plans donot allow for use of Casuals for mechanical or chemical treatment fuels reduction projects. Activation of Contingency Resources Inthe event contingency resources are activated, sending units should respond and support the requesting agency immediately. Non-Fire Fuels Management Activities For policy, guidance, and standards for implementation ofnon-fire fuel reduction treatments (e.g., mechanical, biological, chemical), refer to agency-specific policy and direction.
Chapter 18 Reviews and Investigations Introduction When an accident occurs, each agency will meet their agency-specific accident investigation (AI) reporting requirements (e.g., Department ofthe Interior [DOI] Safety Management Information System (SMIS) or USDA eSafety, https://fsweb.wo.fs.fed.us/hrm/workers-compensation/index.php#esafety). Reviews and investigations are used by wildland fire and aviation managers to assess and improve the effectiveness and safety of organizational operations. Information (other than factual) derived from safety reviews and AIs should only be used by agencies for accident prevention and safety purposes. Multiagency Cooperation Many reviews and investigations involve cooperation between Federal, State, county, and municipal agencies. To comply with each agency’s authorities, policies, and responsibilities, a multiagency review or investigation maybe necessary. A multiagency delegation of authority should be provided to outline roles, responsibilities, and expected deliverables. The team leader or delegating official(s) should establish cooperative relationships with the other agencies involved inthe review or investigation to ensure policies and responsibilities are met. This may involve negotiations, cooperative agreements, and coordination with the agency designated agency safety and health official (DASHO) orthe agency official who signs the delegation of authority. Federal Interagency Investigations Close calls or accidents that involve interagency (Forest Service [FS] orDOI) personnel and/or jurisdiction (e.g., FS firefighter injured on Fish and Wildlife Service [FWS] jurisdictional wildland fire and vice versa) shall be reviewed or investigated cooperatively and conducted atthe appropriate level as outlined in this chapter. Agency administrators will ensure that affected agencies are involved throughout the review/investigation process. When an incident does not meet the serious accident criteria, the affected agency administrators should jointly decide what type and level of investigation will be conducted based on agency processes outlined in this chapter. Questions should be addressed to your agency wildland fire safety program manager. Reviews Reviews are methodical examinations of system elements, such as program management, safety, leadership, operations, preparedness, training, staffing, business practices, budget, cost containment, planning, and interagency or intra-agency cooperation and coordination. Reviews donot have tobe associated with a specific incident. The purpose ofa review isto ensure the effectiveness ofthe system element being reviewed, andto identify deficiencies and recommend specific corrective actions. Established review types are described below and include: • Preparedness review • After action review (AAR) • Fire and Aviation Safety Team (FAST) review • Safety Assistance Team (SAT) visit • Aviation Safety and Technical Assistance Team (ASTAT) review • Wildland Fire Management Annual Report and Large Fire Review – (FS) • Significant wildland fire review or (SWFR) - (DOI) • Individual fire review • Lessons learned review (LLR) • Rapid lesson sharing (RLS) • Declared wildfire review • Air Quality Exceedance Notice of Violation (NOV) review
Review Types and Requirements Type When Conducted Delegating or Authorizing Official Preparedness review Annually, or management discretion Local/state/region/ national After action review Management discretion N/A Fire and Aviation Safety Team review As fire activity dictates Geographic Area Coordinating Group Safety Assistance Team visit As fire activity dictates Local/state/region/ national Aviation Safety and Technical Assistance Team review As aviation activity dictates State/regional aviation manager or MACG Wildland Fire Management Annual Report and Large Fire Review (FS) Washington Office discretion Washington Office Significant wildland fire review (DOI) Refer to Office of Wildland Fire (OWF) Policy Memorandum 2016- 013 Agency director, agency administrator, or individual bureau direction Individual fire review Management discretion Local/state/region/ national Lessons learned review • NPS/FS – FLA may be used Management discretion Local/state/region/ national Rapid lesson sharing Management discretion N/A Declared wildfire review See NWCG Standards for Prescribed Fire Planning and Implementation, PMS 484 See NWCG Standards for Prescribed Fire Planning and Implementation, PMS 484 Air Quality Exceedance Notice of Violation (NOV) See NWCG Standards for Prescribed Fire Planning and Implementation, PMS 484 NWCG Standards for Prescribed Fire Planning and Implementation, PMS 484 Preparedness Review Preparedness reviews assess fire programs for compliance with established fire policies and procedures outlined inthe current Interagency Standards for Fire and Fire Aviation Operations and other pertinent policy documents. Preparedness reviews identify organizational, operational, procedural, personnel, or equipment deficiencies, and recommend specific corrective actions. Interagency preparedness review checklists canbe found onthe NIFC website. After Action Review An after action review (AAR) isa learning tool intended for the evaluation ofan incident or project in order to improve performance by sustaining strengths and correcting weaknesses. AnAAR is performed as soon after the event as possible bythe personnel involved. AnAAR should encourage input from participants that is focused on: • What was planned? • What actually happened? • Whyit happened? • What canbe done the next time? AnAAR isa tool that leaders and units can use toget maximum benefit from the experience gained onany incident or project. When possible, the leader ofthe incident or project should facilitate the AAR process. However, the leader may choose to have another person facilitate the AAR as needed and appropriate. AARs maybe conducted atany organizational level. However, all AARs involve the exchange of ideas and observations, and focus on improving proficiency. The AAR should notbe utilized asan investigational review. The format canbe found inthe Interagency Response Pocket Guide (IRPG), PMS 461, NFES 1077. Additional AAR information is available at https://www.nwcg.gov/wfldp/toolbox/aars. Fire and Aviation Safety Team Review A Fire and Aviation Safety Team (FAST) assists agency administrators during periods of high fire activity by assessing policy, rules, regulations, and management oversight relating to operational issues. They can also dothe following: • Provide guidance to ensure fire and aviation programs are conducted safely; • Assist with providing immediate corrective actions;
• Review compliance with OSHA abatement plan(s), reports, reviews, and evaluations; and • Review compliance with Interagency Standards for Fire and Fire Aviation Operations. FAST reviews canbe requested through geographic area coordination centers (GACC) to conduct reviews atthe state/regional and local level. Ifa more comprehensive review is required, a national FAST canbe ordered through the National Interagency Coordination Center (NICC). FASTs include a team leader, whois either an agency administrator or fire program lead with previous experience asa FAST member, a safety and health manager, and other individuals with amix of skills from fire and aviation management. FASTs will be chartered by their respective Geographic Area Coordinating Group (GACG) with a delegation of authority, and report back tothe GACG. FAST reports will include an executive summary, purpose, objectives, methods/procedures, findings, recommendations, follow-up actions (immediate, long-term, national issues), anda letter delegating authority for the review. FAST reports should be submitted tothe GACG with a copy tothe Federal Fire and Aviation Safety Team (FFAST) chair within 30 days. See appendix Ifor sample FAST delegation of authority. Safety Assistance Team Visit In addition to FAST reviews, Safety Assistance Team (SAT) visits emphasize engaging individual firefighters, managers, and administrators to grasp potential issues, with a focus on firefighting safety fundamentals. SAT visits are not inspections. SATs are often ordered when activity within an area escalates rapidly, or when a high level of activity has been occurring fora long time. SATs canbe single agency or interagency in scope and composition. The goals ofa SSAT areto: • Assist fire managers and IMTs with site visits with firefighters, fire managers, and program leaders. • Be service oriented, assisting the local units. • Provide early warning of potentially hazardous conditions or situations. Direct intervention, circumventing normal chain of command, is authorized when necessary; however, the overall objective isto create a work environment where the normal operating procedures are responsible for safe practices. Aviation Safety and Technical Assistance Team Review Refer to chapter 16for Aviation Safety and Technical Assistant Team (ASTAT) information. Wildland Fire Management Annual Report and Large Fire Review (FS) The Washington Office, Director of Fire and Aviation Management, will select a subset of fires for review based on complexity and national significance, ensuring the selected fires provide a cross-sectional representation of cost, size, and oversight complexity. The reviews will be multi-tiered and foster a working environment that will improve the decision-making process and develop a capacity for organizational learning. Ifa site visit is required, the Washington Office, Deputy Chief, State and Private Forestry, will notify the regional forester. The national review process can include real time analysis of fire information, informal discussions with fire managers and regional personnel, and/or site visits bya cadre of specialists to individual incidents andor geographic areas. For more detail, see FSM 5139.2. Significant Wildland Fire Review (DOI) A significant wildland fire review (SWFR) will be conducted when an incident (single-fire or complex) meets or exceeds Federal combined expenditures of $15 million in suppression costs, and more than 50% ofthe burned acres are managed byone or more DOI bureaus. The DOI is responsible for advising the appropriate individual(s) within their agency ofthe need fora SWFR. When a multi-jurisdictional fire requires review, the DOI bureaus will determine which agency will be designated asthe lead inthe review process. The agency will provide a delegation of authority tothe SWFR team authorizing the implementation ofa review. When possible, SWFRs should be conducted when the incident management team (IMT) is still in place to allow prompt access to records and incident personnel. For more information, see https://www.doi.gov/sites/doi.gov/files/elips/documents/owf_policy_memo_2016- 13_criteria_for_review_wildfire_incidents.pdf. • BLM – The will initiate, facilitate, and provide oversight for the SWFR process when BLMis the lead DOI agency. Upon determination ofthe need fora SWFR, the Assistant Director, FAD, will coordinate with the appropriate state director and assemble a SWFR team, provide a delegation of authority, and initiate the SWFR using the BLM guidance found onthe BLM Fire and Aviation Budget and Evaluation webpage. The Assistant Director, FAD, will provide briefings tothe BLM Director, as appropriate.
• NPS – Management discretion determines when SWFRs will be conducted; the delegating official maybe atthe local, regional, or national level. See the agency administrator and fire management performance tables in chapter 3and the “Review Types and Requirements” table for further information. Individual Fire Review An individual fire review may also be conducted on incidents that donot rise tothe level ofa SWFR. Individual fire reviews examine allor part ofthe operations onan individual fire. The fire maybe ongoing or controlled. These reviews maybe local, state/regional, or national. These reviews evaluate decisions and strategies, correct deficiencies, identify newor improved procedures, techniques, or tactics, determine cost-effectiveness, and compile and develop information to improve local, state/regional, or national fire management programs. • BLM – Any fire that burns more than 50,000 acres of sagebrush rangelands will be evaluated bythe FADto determine ifan individual fire review is warranted. Ifan individual fire review is warranted, the Assistant Director, FAD, will organize a review and provide oversight for the review team. Individual fire reviews may also be conducted when there are significant natural resource concerns or there are policy, political, social, or economic concerns, including significant impacts to infrastructure and energy-related corridors or there are significant and complicated cost-share or multi-jurisdictional issues. Lessons Learned Review The purpose ofa lessons learned review (LLR) isto explore, investigate, or review unintended outcomes or near misses in order to learn from the event and prevent future occurrences. In order to learn from these events, conduct anLLR inan open, non-punitive manner. LLRs are intended to provide educational opportunities that foster open and honest dialog and assist the wildland fire community in sharing lessons learned information. LLRs provide an outside perspective with appropriate technical experts assisting involved personnel in identifying conditions that ledto the unexpected outcome and sharing findings and recommendations. AnLLR should be tailored tothe event being reviewed. The scope ofthe review should be commensurate with the severity ofthe incident. AnLLR will notbe substituted fora serious accident investigation (SAI) or other agency- specific AI reporting requirements (e.g., DOI Safety Management Information System [SMIS] or United States Department of Agriculture [USDA] eSafety [https://fsweb.wo.fs.fed.us/hrm/workers- compensation/index.php#esafety]). • NPS – A facilitated learning analysis (FLA) maybe used for incidents meeting theAI criteria. • FS – AnFLA maybe used for incidents meeting theAI criteria orif a coordinated response protocol (CRP) isnot being utilized foran incident meeting SAI criteria. TheFS’s formal learning review processes are the FLA which maybe used for unintended outcomes ofall types and the CRP reserved forFS employee fatality events. Both processes are explicitly non-punitive and must have a delegation signed bya line officer so stating. Where appropriate, and for less serious incidents theFS may also use the rapid lesson sharing (RLS) process or other review process such as AARs which typically donot have a line officer’s delegation. In some cases, anFLA andan RLS may be produced for the same incident to quickly highlight lessons revealed inthe learning process while the larger narrative is still being compiled. TheFS does not use the SAI process but may assist other agencies inan SAI for incidents involving theFS interests or personnel. FS Aviation accidents and incidents utilize theFS aviation mishap investigation process. Current versions ofthe FLA and CRP guides canbe found onthe Wildland Fire Lessons Learned Center’s (LLC) website. ALLR will beled bya facilitator not involved inthe event. A facilitator should bean appropriate fire management expert who possesses skills in interpersonal communications, organization, andbe unbiased tothe event. Personnel involved inthe event will be participants inthe review process. Depending upon the complexity ofthe event, the facilitator may request assistance from technical experts (e.g., fire behavior, fire operations). The LLR facilitator will convene the participants and: • Obtain a delegation of authority from appropriate agency level. See appendix Gfor a sample LLR delegation of authority; • Identify facts ofthe event (sand tables maybe helpful inthe process) and develop a chronological narrative ofthe event; • Identify underlying reasons for success or unintended outcomes; • Identify what individuals learned and what they would do differently inthe future; • Identify any recommendations that would prevent future similar occurrences; • A24- and72-hour report should be produced asan acknowledgement that an incident has occurred andto distribute initial facts about what happened. These preliminary reports area valuable element ofthe many learning-focused products that LLR teams may produce; and
• Provide a final written report, including the above items tothe pertinent agency administrator(s) within two weeks of event occurrence unless otherwise negotiated. Names of involved personnel should notbe included in this report (reference them by position). A copy ofthe final report will be submitted tothe respective agency’s national fire safety lead who will provide a copy tothe LLC. Refer to https://lessons.wildfire.gov/about-us. Rapid Lesson Sharing RLSis a type of lessons learned review (LLR) for field personnel to quickly share lessons with others. AnRLS canbe used to document and share lessons learned asa result of close calls, minor accidents, successes, efficient ways of performing work, adaptations, or anything from which wildland fire personnel can learn. To visit a searchable database with RLS documents, goto the Incident Review Database Search. To submit or view RLS documents, goto “Submit a Lesson.” Declared Wildfire Reviews Every prescribed fire resulting ina wildfire declaration will receive an outcome review. Declared wildfire outcome review direction is found in these agency documents: • NWCG Standards for Prescribed Fire Planning and Implementation, PMS 484 ○ BLM – Refer to Fuels Management Manual 9214 and Handbook 9214-1, chapter 5. ○ NPS – Refer toRM-18, chapter 7and 17. ○ FWS – Refer to Fire Management Handbook, chapter 17. ○ FS – Refer toFSM 5140. ○ BIA – Refer to Bureau of Indian Affairs Fuels Management Program Supplement tothe NWCG Standards for Prescribed Fire Planning and Implementation (May 2022), chapter 3. Declared wildfire reviews should be submitted toany staff member atthe LLC (https://lessons.wildfire.gov/about- us) bythe agency fuels program lead. Air Quality Exceedance Notice of Violation Reviews AnAir Quality Exceedance Notice of Violation (NOV) review supports understanding ofthe planning, decisions, and actions taken that contributed tothe NOV. Refer toPMS 484. Investigations Investigations are detailed and methodical efforts to collect and interpret facts related toan incident or accident, identify causes or conditions that contributed tothe accident (organizational factors, local workplace factors, unsafe acts), and develop control measures to prevent recurrence. In addition to agency-specific AI reporting requirements (SMIS/eSafety), distinct types of wildland fire incidents and accidents have specific investigation requirements. Wildland Fire Incident and Accident Types and Definitions • Serious Wildland Fire Accident – An unplanned event or series of events that resulted in death, injury, occupational illness, or damage toor loss of equipment or property. For wildland fire operations, a serious accident involves anyof the following: ○ Oneor more job-related fatalities or imminently fatal injuries or illnesses to employees, volunteers, contractors, orthe public; ○ Thein-patient hospitalization of three or more employees, volunteers, or members ofthe public dueto departmental operations; ○ Amputation(s) or loss ofan eye(s); ○ Property damage (including site mitigation or cleanup) or operating loss of $500,000or more, or (6) accident, illness; ○ Incident that a Bureau DASHO judges to warrant further investigation using the serious accident investigation procedures. • Wildland Fire Accident – An unplanned event or series of events that resulted in injury, occupational illness, or damage toor loss of equipment or property toa lesser degree than defined ina “serious wildland fire accident.” • Near-miss – An unplanned event or series of events that could have resulted in death, injury, occupational illness, or damage toor loss of equipment or property but did not. • Entrapment – A situation where personnel are unexpectedly caught ina fire behavior-related, life-threatening position where planned escape routes or safety zones are absent, inadequate, or compromised. Entrapment mayor may not include deployment ofa fire shelter for its intended purpose. Entrapment may result ina serious wildland fire accident, a wildland fire accident, ora near-miss. • Burnover – An event in which a fire moves through a location or overtakes personnel or equipment where there isno opportunity to utilize escape routes and safety zones, often resulting in personal injury or equipment damage. • Fire Shelter Deployment – The removing ofa fire shelter from its case and unfolding itto useas protection against heat, smoke and burning embers. • Fire Trespass – The occurrence of unauthorized fire on agency-protected lands where the source of ignition is tied to some type of human activity. AI types and final reports should be commensurate with the complexity and/or severity ofthe accident and focus on organizational learning and the prevention of reoccurrence. Investigations and reports may range from large investigation teams producing comprehensive AI reports to first-level supervisors initiating investigations and reporting injury/property damage in their agency-specific reporting systems (SMIS/eSafety). Final AI reports may range between agency- specific accident reports, small one-page RLSs, LLR reports (simple or complex), to extensive investigation reports that follow the same format asa serious accident. Investigation and Review Types and Requirements Wildland Fire Event Investigation or Review Type Management Level Requiring Notification1 Management level that determines review type and authorizes review2 Serious wildland fire accident SAIFS –FLA process orthe CRP for FS employee fatality events. National National Wildland fire accident SAI, AI, LLR, RLS, depending on severity. This isin addition to agency- specific accident report (e.g., SMIS/eSafety) NPS/FS – FLA may be used BLM/NPS–National FWS/FS – Management discretion Region/state/local Entrapment/ burnover SAI, AI, LLR, RLS depending on severity National National/regional/ state Fire shelter deployment SAI, AI, LLR, RLS depending on severity National National/regional/ state Near-miss LLR, AAR, RLS Management discretion Region/state/local Fire trespass Fire cause determination and trespass investigation Local Local 1In the event that a wildland fire entrapment or fatality occurs, immediate notification to NICC is required. A Wildland Fire Fatality and Entrapment Initial Report, PMS 405-1, should be submitted to NICC within 24 hours. Submit this report even if some data is missing. 2Higher level management may exercise their authority to determine the type of review or investigation. • BLM – When aBLM employee is involved, investigations will occur regardless of land jurisdiction. BLM agency administrators may jointly delegate authority to investigate accidents in cases of mixed jurisdiction or employee involvement. Joint delegations must ensure that BLMAI reporting requirements are met. • FS – FS line officers are the deciding officials regarding what type ofAI or analysis method isto be used for accidents or near misses occurring under FS jurisdiction. Investigation Processes Processes Common toAll Wildland Fire Accident Investigations • Site Protection – The site ofthe incident should be secured immediately and nothing moved or disturbed until the area is photographed and visually reviewed bythe investigation team. Exact locations of injured personnel, entrapments, injuries, fatalities, and the condition and location of personal protective equipment (PPE), property, and other equipment must be documented. • Management of Involved Personnel – Treatment, transport, and follow-up care must be immediately arranged for injured and involved personnel. The agency administrator or delegate should develop a roster of involved personnel and supervisors and ensure all personnel are available for interviews bythe investigation team. The agency administrator should consider relieving involved supervisors from fireline duty until the preliminary investigation has been completed. Attempt to collect initial statements from the involved individuals prior toa critical incident stress management (CISM) session.
• Delegation of Authority – A delegation of authority shall be issued bythe agency administrator tothe investigation team leader. The delegation of authority will outline roles, responsibilities, and expected deliverables. Delegation of authority templates are available from agency fire safety program managers. • Critical Incident Stress Management (CISM) – CISM isthe responsibility of local agency administrators, who should have individuals preidentified for critical incident stress debriefings. Also refer tothe Agency Administrator’s Guide to Critical Incident Management, PMS 926. Individuals or teams maybe available through employee assistance programs (EAP) or GACCs. Wildland Fire Accident Investigation Process • DOI – All DOI aviation accident and incident investigations are conducted in accordance with 352DM 3and the DOI Aircraft Mishap Notification, Investigation, and Reporting Handbook. • FS – TheFS does not use the SAI process but may assist other agencies inan SAI for incidents involving theFS interests or personnel. FS aviation accidents and incidents utilize theFS aviation mishap investigation process. TheFS’s response to serious accidents includes the FLA which maybe used for unintended outcomes ofall types and the CRP reserved for coordination and response toFS serious accidents. Current versions ofthe Learning From Unintended Outcomes and CRP guides canbe found onthe LLC’s website (https://lessons.wildfire.gov/). Accident investigations and reports should be commensurate with the complexity and/or severity ofthe accident and focus on organizational learning and the prevention of reoccurrence. Investigations and reports may range from large investigation teams producing comprehensive reports to first-level supervisors initiating investigations and reporting injury/property damage in agency reporting systems (e.g., SMIS/eSafety). Final accident investigation reports may range between agency-specific accident reports, small one-page RLS, LLR reports (simple or complex), to extensive investigation reports that follow the same format asa serious accident. Notification When an accident occurs, agency notification requirements will be followed. Notification requirements universally include: • Local dispatch center • Unit fire management officer (FMO) • Agency administrator • Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) (Refer to chapter 7for reporting criteria.) Investigation Team Membership Investigation team membership should be commensurate with the complexity and/or severity ofthe accident. An investigation team should consist ofa team leader andan adequate number of technical specialists and subject matter experts. For complex investigations, team membership may also include a chief investigator, a safety advisor/manager, and additional technical specialists, anda writer/editor. Team members may have dual roles (e.g., chief investigator/safety advisor). Investigation Methodology Accident investigations are detailed and methodical efforts to collect and interpret facts related toan accident andto provide specific recommendations to prevent recurrence. TheAI may include the following actions: • Visual inspection of involved site, equipment, or material; • Detailed analysis of equipment or material, as necessary; • Interviews with involved personnel, witnesses, managers, and other pertinent persons; • Collection and review of written statements; • Review of records, archives, plans, policies, procedures, and other pertinent documents; • Consideration of environmental, equipment, material, procedural, and human factors as they related tothe incident; and • Development of specific findings and related recommendations for the AI report. Accident Investigation 24- and72-Hour Reports The24- and72-hour reports should be completed when anAI will be conducted. Final 24- and72-hour reports will be approved bythe AI delegating official, then sent tothe agency fire safety/risk management lead who will provide a copy tothe LLC. Submissions should be sent toany LLC staff member at https://lessons.wildfire.gov/about-us. • 24-Hour Preliminary Report – This report contains known basic facts about the accident and will be completed and forwarded bythe responsible agency administrator tothe next higher level (e.g., district manager forwards to state director). Names of injured personnel will notbe included in this report. Personnel maybe referenced by position.
• 72-Hour Expanded Report – This report provides additional factual information, if available. The information may include the number of victims and severity of injuries. The focus should beon information that may have immediate impact on future accident prevention. TheAI team will complete and forward the report tothe AI delegating official. Names of injured personnel will notbe included in this report. Personnel maybe referenced by position. Accident Investigation Final Report Within approximately 60 calendar days ofthe accident, a final report shall be submitted tothe senior manager dependent upon the level of investigation (e.g., local agency administrator, state/regional director, and agency fire director or their designee). Ifa lower-level investigation is conducted, a courtesy copy ofthe final report shall be sent tothe respective agency’s national fire safety/risk management lead. The final report (minus names of employees—they should be referenced by position) will be submitted toLLC bythe respective agency’s national fire safety leads. Submissions should be sent toany LLC staff member at https://lessons.wildfire.gov/about-us. Accident Investigation Report Standard Contents AI reports will vary in length, format, and complexity. Each report should be commensurate tothe complexity ofthe incident and focus on organizational learning and the prevention of reoccurrence. The following list is common or standard contents often found in accident investigation reports. • Executive Summary – A brief narrative ofthe facts involving the accident including dates, locations, times, name of incident, jurisdiction(s), number of individuals involved, etc. Names of injured personnel or personnel involved inthe accident are not tobe included in this report (reference them by position). • Narrative – A detailed chronological narrative of events leading upto and including the accident, as well as rescue and medical actions taken after the accident. This section will contain who, what, and where. • Investigation Process – A brief narrative of actions taken bythe investigation team. This narrative should include investigation team membership, delegation of authority information (from who and contents, include a copy asan appendix), investigative actions and timeline (when the team conducted interviews, inspections, site visits, etc.), andif other sources were consulted (e.g., professional accident reconstruction experts, equipment manufacturers). This section may also address if environmental, equipment, material, procedural, and human factors were present, and state how findings/recommendations were developed. • Findings/Recommendations ○ Findings – Developed from the factual information. Each finding isa single event or condition. Each finding isan essential step inthe accident sequence, but each finding isnot necessarily causal or contributing, and each finding may not have an associated recommendation. Findings should only include information necessary to explain the specific event or condition. Findings must be substantiated bythe factual data. Findings should not include opinion or speculation. ○ Discussion – This provides explanation or information pertinent toa specific finding. ○ Recommendations – Recommendations are proposed actions intended to prevent similar accidents. Recommendations should be directly related to findings, should not contain opinion or speculation, and when appropriate, should identify the specific organization responsible for completing the recommended action. Recommendations will be evaluated and may be incorporated into future operational direction through established processes. • Conclusions and Observations – Investigation team’s opinions and inferences, and lessons learned maybe captured inthe section. • Reference Materials ○ Maps/Photographs/Illustrations – Graphic information used to document and visually portray facts. ○ Appendices – Reference materials (e.g., fire behavior analysis, equipment maintenance reports, agreements). Examples ofAI reports are available from agency fire safety program managers. Wildland Fire Serious Accident Investigation Process For interagency serious accident investigations (SAI), a multi-agency delegation of authority to conduct the investigation maybe issued. The delegation will ensure that the investigation meets the policy requirements of involved agencies. • DOI – The DOI Serious Accident Investigation Guide establishes core direction for DOI and interagency SAIs (exceptions for aviation accidents are stated inthe guide). The guide provides SAI teams (SAIT) a standardized and comprehensive process for conducting SAIs. SAI reports will be completed, routed, and disseminated according to processes established inthe guide. Reports may contain information supplemental tothe
requirements ofthe guide ifit augments the ability to learn andto develop further improvements. The guide maybe used entirely orin part for accidents that donot meet the serious accident definition. • DOI – All DOI aviation accident and incident investigations are conducted in accordance with 352DM 3and the DOI Aircraft Mishap Notification, Investigation, and Reporting Handbook. • FS – TheFS does not use the SAI process but may assist other agencies inan SAI for incidents involving theFS interests or personnel. FS aviation accidents and incidents utilize theFS aviation mishap investigation process. TheFS’s response to serious accidents includes the FLA which maybe used for unintended outcomes ofall types and the CRP reserved for coordination and response toFS serious accidents. Current versions ofthe Learning From Unintended Outcomes and CRP guides canbe found onthe LLC’s website (https://lessons.wildfire.gov/). Fire Director Responsibilities The fire director(s) or designee(s) ofthe lead agency, or agency responsible for the land upon which the accident occurred, will: • Ensure the agency safety manager and DASHO have been notified; • Immediately appoint, authorize (through delegation of authority), and deploy an accident investigation team; • Provide resources and procedures adequate to meet the team’s needs; • Receive the factual and management evaluation reports and take action to accept or reject recommendations; • Forward investigation findings, recommendations, and corrective action plan tothe DASHO (the agency safety office isthe “office or record” for reports); • Convene an accident review board/board of review (if deemed necessary) to evaluate the adequacy ofthe factual and management reports and suggest corrective actions; • Ensure a corrective action plan is developed, incorporating management initiatives established to address accident causal factors; and • Ensure SAIs remain independent of other investigations. Agency Administrator Responsibilities • Develop local preparedness plans to guide emergency response. • Identify agencies with jurisdictional responsibilities for the accident. • Provide for and emphasize treatment and care of survivors. • Ensure the incident commander (IC) secures the accident site. • Conduct anin-briefing tothe investigation team. • Facilitate and support the investigation as requested. • Determine need and implement CISM. • Notify home Tribe leadership inthe case ofa Native American fatality. • Prepare and issue the required 24-hour preliminary report unless formally delegated to another individual. Notification Agency reporting requirements will be followed. As soon asa serious accident is verified, the following groups or individuals should be notified: • Agency administrator; • Public affairs; • Agency law enforcement; • Safety personnel; • County sheriff or local law enforcement as appropriate to jurisdiction; • NICC through the local dispatch center and GACC. Provide a Wildland Fire Fatality and Entrapment Initial Report, PMS 405-1, directly to NICC within 24 hours; • Agency headquarters; and • Following agency policy, notify OSHA when an employee is killed onthe jobor suffers a work-related hospitalization, amputation, or loss ofan eye. ○ A fatality must be reported within 8 hours. ○ Anin-patient hospitalization, amputation, oreye loss must be reported within 24 hours. Notification tothe respective agency’s fire national safety/risk management lead is required. Designating the Investigation Team Lead The 1995 Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between theU.S. Department ofthe Interior and the U.S. Department of Agriculture states that serious wildland fire-related accidents will be investigated by interagency investigation teams.
The Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) between Department of Agriculture Forest Service and Department ofthe Interior augments and provides clarification tothe 1995 MOU for investigation type and team lead/deputy team lead/interagency representative designation. The MOA also provides an interagency template for joint delegation of authority. The MOA is available from agency fire safety program managers. Following initial notification ofa serious accident, the agency DASHO will designate aSAI team leader(s) and provide that person(s) with a written delegation of authority to conduct the investigation and the means to form and deploy an investigation team. • BLM/NPS/FWS – The agency DASHOs have delegated this responsibility tothe respective agency fire directors. • BLM – The FAD Safety Program Manager mobilizes SAITs in coordination with the SAI team leader. Accidents involving more than one agency will require a collaboratively developed delegation of authority that is signed by each ofthe respective agencies. Serious Accident Investigation Team Composition Serious accident investigation team (SAIT) members should notbe affiliated with the unit that sustained the accident. Team Leader (Core Team Member) The team leader isa senior agency management official, atthe equivalent associate/assistant regional/state/area/division director level. The team leader will direct the investigation and serve asthe point of contact tothe designated agency safety and health official (DASHO). Chief Investigator (Core Team Member) The chief investigator isa qualified accident investigation specialist is responsible for the direct management ofall investigation activities. The chief investigator reports tothe team leader. Accident Investigation Advisor/Safety Manager (Core Team Member) The accident investigation advisor/safety manager isan experienced safety and occupational health specialist or manager who acts asan advisor tothe team leader to ensure that the investigation focus remains on safety and health issues. The accident investigation advisor/safety manager also works to ensure strategic management issues are examined. Delegating officials or their designee may, at their discretion, fill this position with a trained and qualified National Wildfire Coordinating Group (NWCG) safety officer type 3 (SOF3), safety officer, type 2 (SOF2), safety officer, type 1 (SOF1), or safety officer complex (SOFC). Interagency Representative An interagency representative will be assigned to every fire-related SAIT. The interagency representative will assist as assigned designated bythe team leader and will provide a perspective from outside the agency. Technical Specialists Technical specialists are qualified and experienced in specialized occupations, activities, skills, and equipment, addressing specific technical issues such as specialized fire equipment, weather, and fire behavior. Public Affairs Officer For investigations with high public visibility and significant news media interest, a public affairs officer (PAO) should be considered a part ofthe team. The PAO should develop a communications plan for the team, bea designated point of contact for news media, and oversee all aspects of internal and external communications. Ideally, the PAO should be qualified asa complex, type 1, or type 2 public information officer andbe familiar with SAIT organization and function. • BLM – All media-related documents (news releases, talking points, etc.) should be cleared through NIFC Public Affairs prior to external release. Core SAIT members are required to take the Interagency Serious Accident Investigation Course (1112-05) prior toan SAI assignment. This training is required every 5 years to maintain currency unless the core SAIT member has completed an SAIT assignment within the last 5 years. • BLM/FWS – This training is required every 5 years to retain currency. Serious Accident Investigation 24- and72-Hour Reports The final 24-hour report will be approved bythe agency administrator in concurrence with the SAI delegating official. The72-hour report will be approved bythe SAI delegating official. Both reports are sent tothe agency fire safety/risk management lead who will provide a copy tothe LLC. Submissions should be sent toany LLC staff member at https://lessons.wildfire.gov/about-us.
• 24-Hour Preliminary Report – The24-hour preliminary report contains known basic facts about the accident. The responsible agency administrator will complete the report and forward tothe SAI delegating official. Names of injured personnel will notbe included in this report. Personnel maybe referenced by position. • 72-Hour Expanded Report – The72-hour report provides additional factual information, if available. The information may include the number of victims and severity of injuries. The focus should beon information that may have immediate impact on future accident prevention. The SAIT will complete and forward the72-hour expanded report tothe SAI delegating official. Names of injured personnel will notbe included in this report; positions maybe referenced. Serious Accident Investigation Report Within 60 calendar days ofthe incident, the SAIT will produce a final accident investigation report anda management evaluation report and forward tothe DASHO through the agency fire director(s). • Accident Investigation Report (AIR) – The AIR contains a brief summary or background ofthe event and facts based only on examination of technical and procedural issues related to equipment and tactical fire operations. The AIR does not contain opinions, conclusions, or recommendations. Names of injured personnel are not tobe included in this report; positions maybe referenced. Post-accident actions (emergency response attribute to survival ofa victim, etc.) should be included in this report. AIRs will be submitted toLLC bythe respective agency’s fire safety/risk management leads. Submissions should be sent toany LLC staff member at https://lessons.wildfire.gov/about-us. • Management Evaluation Report (MER) – The MER is intended for internal use only and explores management policies, practices, procedures, and personal performance related tothe accident. The MER categorizes findings identified inthe AIR and provides recommendations to prevent or reduce the risk of similar accidents. Accident Review Board/Board of Review An accident review board/board of review is used by some agencies to evaluate recommendations and develop a corrective action plan. Refer tothe respective agency’s safety and health policy. Fire Cause Determination and Trespass Investigation Introduction Agency policy requires determination of cause, origin, and responsibility for all wildfires. Accurate fire cause determination isa critical first step fora successful fire investigation and for targeting fire prevention efforts. Proper investigative procedures, which occur concurrent with initial attack, more accurately pinpoint fire causes and can preserve valuable evidence that would otherwise be destroyed by suppression activities. Fire trespass refers tothe occurrence of unauthorized fire on agency-protected lands where the source of ignition is tied to some type of human activity. Initiation of fire cause determination must be started with notification ofan incident. Initial attack dispatchers are responsible for capturing all pertinent information when the fire is reported and throughout the incident. The initial attack ICand the initial attack forces are responsible for protecting the origin area and initiating fire cause determination and documenting observations starting with their travel tothe fire. If probable cause indicates human involvement, an individual qualified in fire cause determination (wildland fire investigator [INVF] or cooperator equivalent) should be dispatched tothe fire. Policy The agency must pursue cost recovery, or document why cost recovery isnot required, for all human-caused fires on public lands. The agency will also pursue cost recovery for other lands under fire protection agreement where the agency isnot reimbursed for suppression actions, if stipulated inthe agreement. For all human-caused fires where negligence canbe determined, trespass actions areto be taken to recover cost of suppression activities, land rehabilitation, and damages tothe resource and improvements. Only fires started by natural causes will notbe considered for trespass and related cost recovery. The determination whether to proceed with trespass action must be made on “incident facts,” noton “cost or ability topay.” Trespass collection is both a cost recovery anda deterrent to prevent future damage to public land. Pursue collection of costs, regardless of amount. This determination must be documented and filed inthe unit office’s official fire report file. Unless specified otherwise inan approved protection agreement, the agency that has the land management jurisdiction/administration role is accountable for determining the cause of ignition, responsible party, and for obtaining all billable costs, performing the billing, collection, and distribution ofthe collected funds. The agency with the fire protection responsibility role must provide the initial determination of cause tothe agency with the land
management jurisdiction/administration role. The agency providing fire protection shall provide a detailed report of suppression costs that will allow the jurisdictional agency to proceed with trespass procedures ina timely manner. Each agency’s role in fire trespass billing and collection must be specifically defined ina relevant cooperative fire protection agreement between Federal and State cooperators. Federal agencies will follow established procedures for each agency and utilize the Intra-Governmental Payment and Collection (IPAC) system to transfer funds. Agency references: • BLM – H-9238-1 • NPS – RM-18, chapter 6and RM-9 • FWS – 621FW 1 • FS – FSM 5130 and FSM 5300 • BIA – For guidance regarding origin and cause determination on lands under the jurisdiction ofthe Bureau of Indian Affairs, see90 IAM6-H Wildland Fire Origin and Cause Investigation Handbook at https://www.bia.gov/sites/default/files/dup/assets/public/raca/handbook/pdf/90_iam_6- h_wildfire_investigations_hb_final_signed_9.25.23_w.footer_508.pdf. • BIA – For guidance regarding fire trespass and damage to Indian forest products on lands under the jurisdiction ofthe Bureau of Indian Affairs, see53 IAM, chapter 7-H, Indian Forest Management Handbook – Forest Trespass (https://www.bia.gov/sites/bia.gov/files/assets/bia/ots/dfwfm/pdf/idc-022535.pdf and https://www.bia.gov/policy-forms/handbooks). Related Policy Documents These documents provide specific direction related to incident and accident investigations. Safety Prescribed Fire DOI 485 DM, chapter 7352 DM3 and DOI Aircraft Mishap Notification, Investigation, and Reporting Handbook BLM DOI Occupational Safety and Health Program – Field Manual, H-1112-1NPS DO/RM-50B, RM-18, chapter 3RM-18, chapter 7FWS 240FW 7FS FSH-6709.11FSM-5140 FSM-5100 and FSH-6709.11, FSM 5720 (Aviation), FSM 5130 (Ground Operations), FSM 6730 (Specific Policy), FSH 6709.12 chapter 30 (General Guidance), and most recent Accident Investigation Guide, for specific guidance. Same as “Safety” Interagency Information on accident investigations maybe found inthe Interagency Serious Accident Investigation Guide. For reporting, use the Wildland Fire Fatality and Entrapment Initial Report, PMS 405-1. Same as “Safety”
Chapter 19 Dispatch and Coordination System Introduction The primary mission ofthe national dispatch/coordination system isthe timely, cost-effective, and efficient coordination, mobilization, and demobilization of wildland fire resources. This mission is accomplished atthe direction of agency administrators and designated fire managers atthe local, geographic, and national level and delegated tothe center manager. Agency administrators and fire managers are responsible for providing direction to their respective dispatch/coordination centers. The dispatch/coordination system implements the movement of resources in response tothe direction as delegated. Agency administrators and fire managers will: • Provide oversight for the development and implementation of dispatch/coordination center plans and operating procedures (e.g., initial response plans, dispatch operating guides/manuals, and mobilization guides) that enable the effective implementation ofthe fire management plan (FMP). • Through prior planning, provide dispatch with an initial response plan to allocate resources tonew incidents under the leadership ofthe center manager or delegated acting. • Establish priorities for prepositioning and deployment of fire suppression resources based on evaluation of current/predicted fire activity and firefighting resource status and availability and communicate these priorities tothe dispatch/coordination managers through established command channels for implementation. • Serve as authorized representatives on local, geographic, and national coordinating groups and multiagency coordinating (MAC) groups. Dispatch/coordination center managers will: • Ensure that dispatch/coordination center decisions and actions are consistent with priorities, established plans, and operating procedures as determined by agency administrators and fire managers. • Implement preplanned response for allocation of resources tonew incidents, pursuant to their delegation from agency administrators and designated fire managers. • Develop and implement dispatch/coordination center plans and operating procedures (e.g., initial response plans, dispatch operating guides/manuals, and mobilization guides) that enable the effective implementation ofthe fire management plan. National Dispatch/Coordination System The wildland fire dispatch and coordination system inthe United States has three levels (tiers): • National – National Interagency Coordination Center (NICC) • Geographic – Geographic Area Coordination Centers (GACC) • Local – Local dispatch centers Logistical dispatch operations occur atall three levels, while initial attack dispatch operations occur primarily atthe local level. Any geographic area or local dispatch center using a dispatch system outside the three-tier system must justify whya non-standard system is being used and request written authorization from the BLM, FWS, and/orNPS national office or USFS regional office. National Interagency Coordination Center The National Interagency Coordination Center (NICC) is located atthe National Interagency Fire Center (NIFC), in Boise, Idaho. The principal mission of NICC isthe cost-effective and timely coordination of land management agency emergency response for wildland fire atthe national level. This is accomplished through planning, situation monitoring, and expediting resource orders between the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) areas, Bureau of Land Management (BLM) states, National Association of State Foresters (NASF), Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) regions, Forest Service (FS) regions, National Park Service (NPS) regions, National Weather Service (NWS) regions, Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) regions through the United States Fire Administration (USFA), and other cooperating agencies. The NICC coordinates any requests for support from foreign countries, either through Departments of Agriculture (USDA) and Interior (DOI) agreements (Canada and Mexico) or arrangements (Australia and New Zealand), or from the Forest Service International Programs’ Disaster Assistance Support Program (DASP) through theU.S. Agency for International Development’s Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance. The NICC supports non-fire emergencies when tasked byan appropriate agency, such as FEMA, through the National Response Framework (NRF). The NICC collects and consolidates information from the GACCs and disseminates the National Incident Management Situation Report through the NICC website.
Geographic Area Coordination Centers There are10 GACCs, each of which serve a specific geographic portion ofthe United States. Each GACC interacts with the local dispatch centers, as well as with NICC and neighboring GACCs. Refer tothe National Interagency Standards for Resource Mobilization fora complete directory of GACC locations, addresses, and personnel. The principal mission of each GACC isto provide the cost-effective and timely coordination of emergency response for all incidents within the specified geographic area. GACCs are also responsible for: • Determining needs; • Coordinating priorities; • Facilitating mobilization of resources within their geographic area (GA) andin support of other GAs; and • Supplying intelligence associated with incidents and resource availability within their GAto NICC and cooperating agencies. Local Dispatch Centers Local dispatch centers are located throughout the country as dictated bythe needs of fire management agencies. Local dispatch centers dispatch multi-agency wildland firefighting resources within a preestablished and identified dispatch zone boundary. The principal mission ofa local dispatch center isto provide safe, timely, and cost-effective coordination of emergency response for all incidents within its specified geographic area. This entails the coordination of initial attack responses and the ordering of additional resources when fires require extended attack. Local dispatch centers are also responsible for supplying intelligence and information relating to fires and resource status to their GACC andto their agency managers and cooperators. Local dispatch centers may work for, or with, numerous agencies, but should only report toone GACC. Some local dispatch centers are also tasked with law enforcement and agency administrative workloads for non- wildfire operations. If this isthe case, a commensurate amount of funding and training should be provided bythe benefiting activity to accompany the increased workload. Ifnon-wildfire workload is generated by another agency operating inan interagency dispatch center, the agency generating the additional workload should offset this increased workload with additional funding or personnel. Mobilization Guides The NICC and each GACC annually publish a mobilization guide. The mobilization guides identify standard procedures which guide the operations of multi-agency logistical support activity throughout the coordination system. These guides are intended to facilitate interagency dispatch coordination, ensuring timely and cost-effective incident support services are provided. Local and geographic area mobilization guides supplement the National Interagency Standards for Resource Mobilization. The National Interagency Standards for Resource Mobilization (NFES 2092) and links to geographic area mobilization guides are available onthe NICC website (https://www.nifc.gov/nicc/geographic-areas). Local Mobilization Guide/Dispatch Operating Plan Local dispatch centers will have a local mobilization guide or dispatch operating plan to supplement the GACC and national mobilization guides. The mobilization guide or operating plan will include or provide reference tothe minimum elements and procedures to guide the operation ofa local dispatch center. See appendix Lfor minimum required elements and procedures for inclusion ina local mobilization guide/dispatch operating plan. Local and Geographic Area Drawdown Drawdown isthe predetermined number and type of suppression resources that are required to maintain viable initial attack capability at either the local or geographic area. Drawdown resources are considered unavailable outside the local or geographic area for which they have been identified. Drawdown is intended to: • Ensure adequate fire suppression capability for local and/or geographic area managers; and • Enable sound planning and preparedness atall management levels. Although drawdown resources are considered unavailable outside the local or geographic area for which they have been identified, they may still be reallocated bythe geographic area or national MACto meet higher priority obligations. Establishing Drawdown Levels Local drawdown is established bythe local unit and/orthe local MAC group and implemented bythe local dispatch office. The local dispatch office will notify the Geographic Area Coordination Center (GACC) of local drawdown decisions and actions.
Geographic area drawdown is established bythe Geographic Multi-Agency Coordinating Group (GMAC) and implemented bythe GACC. The GACC will notify the local dispatch offices and NICC of geographic area drawdown decision and actions. National Ready Reserve National Ready Reserve (NRR) isa means by which the NMAC identifies and readies specific categories, types, and quantities of fire suppression resources in order to maintain overall national readiness during periods of actual or predicted national suppression resource scarcity. NRR implementation responsibilities areas follows: • NMAC establishes NRR requirements by resource category, type, and quantity. • NICC implements NMAC intent by directing individual GACCs to place specific categories, types, and quantities of resources onNRR. • GACCs direct local dispatch centers and/or assigned incident management teams (IMT) to specifically identify resources tobe placed onNRR. • NICC mobilizes NRR assets through normal coordination system channels as necessary. National ready reserve resources must meet the following requirements: • Maybe currently assigned to ongoing incidents; • Must be able to demobilize andbe en route tonew assignment in less than 2 hours; • Resources must have a minimum of7 days left in14-day rotation (extensions will notbe factored in this calculation); • Maybe assigned to incidents after being designated ready reserve, in coordination with NICC; and • Designated ready reserve resources maybe adjusted ona daily basis. NMAC will adjust ready reserve requirements as needed. Furthermore, in order to maintain national surge capability, NMAC may retain available resources within a geographic area, over and above the established geographic area drawdown level. Dispatch/Coordination Center Administration Memorandum of Understanding Each dispatch/coordination center will have a memorandum of understanding (MOU) signed byall cooperators. This MOU will be reviewed and updated annually. Dispatch/coordination center MOUs and their associated operating plans will be current and will define: • The roles and responsibilities of each interagency partner’s fiscal and infrastructure support responsibilities; • Administrative oversight/support groups involved with the dispatch/coordination center; • Clear fiscal reimbursement procedures and interagency funding procedures; • The dispatch/coordination center’s organizational charts; • Communication protocols for local and geographic area cooperating agencies, including briefings, planned meetings, and conference calls; • Procedures for IMT mobilization and close-out; and • Supporting documentation, such asany local initial attack or fire and aviation agreements for units serviced bythe center. Funding for facilities, equipment, and staffing needs shall be identified in each participating agency’s planning and budget process and included inthe MOU/operating plan. Service and Supply Plans All local dispatch centers shall maintain a service and supply plan that contains current copies of procurement documents related to locally available resources. Service and supply plans must be current, complete, organized, and accessible to initial attack and expanded dispatchers. The service and supply plan will contain current copies of competitive incident blanket purchase agreements (I- BPAs), as well as source lists for incident-only agreements. Resources and their respective contracts/agreements will be entered into the Interagency Resource Ordering Capability (IROC) system, if applicable; and naming conventions will meet national standards. For additional required components ofa service and supply plan, refer to appendix L. Continuity of Operations Plan All centers will maintain a current continuity of operations plan (COOP) which includes a preidentified alternate location with adequate supplies, notification procedures for activation, a back-up computer system, and contingency
plans for loss of telecommunications equipment and/or loss of access to network connectivity. Additionally, all centers which are required to maintain communications with field-going resources, including aircraft, will ensure the COOP identifies procedures to maintain and/or transfer communications inthe event ofa possible loss of radios and/or telecommunications equipment. The dispatch/coordination center may, when appropriate, delegate services and program access to neighboring centers or across geographical boundaries. This may include, butis not limited to, radio communication transfer, processing of IROC requests, utilization ofCAD programs, etc. A dispatch center anda coordination center maybe designated asan emergency facility that meets the requirements of applicable building codes and NFPA standards for communication centers. They shall be equipped with a critical operations power system (COPS) that provides emergency power to communications systems, information technology (IT) rooms, telephone and radio rooms, electrical equipment rooms, mechanical equipment, fire protection equipment rooms, sanitary facilities, security systems, and other spaces and equipment designated bythe Authority Having Jurisdiction (AHJ) as requiring critical operations power. Dispatch/Coordination Center Manager Delegation of Authority All dispatch/coordination center managers shall have a signed delegation of authority providing an adequate level of operational authority from all participating agencies. The delegation of authority will include appropriate supervisory authority anda process for completion of employee performance evaluations. The dispatch/coordination center manager may, where appropriate, complete a delegation of authority for staff that identifies roles and responsibilities for the acting center manager, coordinator-on-duty, floor supervisor, and/or internal duty officer. National Interagency Coordination Center Functional Responsibilities The NICC has established the coordinator-on-duty (NICC COD) position. The NICC CODis responsible for managing the daily operation ofthe NICC and for resource allocation decisions in alignment with NMAC direction. Positioning and Movement of Resources The NICC, in conjunction with the GACCs, is responsible for ensuring a coordinated response to wildland fire incidents and/orall-hazards incidents under the NRF or other appropriate authorities. The NICC positions resources (personnel, aircraft, supplies, and equipment) to meet existing and anticipated incident, preparedness, severity, wildland, and prescribed fire needs regardless of geographic location or agency affiliation. Additionally, NICC coordinates movement of resources across geographic area boundaries and allocates resources according to NMAC direction when competition for wildland fire resources occurs among geographic areas. Management of National Aviation Resources As directed or delegated by NMAC, NICC allocates national resource aviation assets, in conjunction with appropriate agency aviation leadership, tothe geographic areas based upon national priorities. These national resources include: • Federal airtankers • Federal single engine airtankers (SEATs) • Large transport aircraft • Modular Airborne Fire Fighting System (MAFFS) airtankers • Type 1and 2FS exclusive-use (EU)/call-when-needed (CWN) helicopters and associated helitack and/or rappellers • Airborne thermal infrared (IR) fire mapping aircraft • Leadplanes and aerial supervision modules • Smokejumpers • Smokejumper aircraft • Water scoopers • Federally contracted, EUand CWN unmanned aircraft system (UAS) • Rappelers The NICC has established authorities and procedures for dispatching aviation resources. These authorities and procedures include: • Aircraft ordering protocols for fire, logistical and administrative flights; • Tracking ofall aircraft ordered through NICC that cross geographic area boundaries; • Mechanisms for disseminating availability and commitment status throughout the dispatch/coordination system; and
• Procedures for mobilization and use of large transport aircraft (NICC isthe sole source for large transport aircraft). • GACCs hosting national type 1and 2 helicopters will coordinate with NICC prior to releasing flight crews for the day when those resources are not being used within the host area and could be utilized elsewhere for emerging or ongoing fire activity. • Priority should be given toEU aviation assets over CWN aviation assets whenever feasible. Management of National Support Resources NICC mobilizes national support resources such as National Interagency Incident Communications Division (NIICD) radio systems and kits, incident remote automatic weather stations (RAWS), project remote automatic weather stations, national contract mobile food services, and national contract mobile shower facilities. Refer tothe National Interagency Standards for Resource Mobilization for more information. Allocation of Other National Resources As directed or delegated bythe NMAC, NICC mobilizes national program resources such as complex incident management teams, national interagency buying teams, administrative payment teams, burned area emergency response teams, and national fire prevention and education teams tothe geographic areas based upon national priorities. Refer tothe National Interagency Standards for Resource Mobilization for more information. Predictive Services The National Predictive Services Program mission isto integrate climate, weather, fuels, situation, and incident resource status information to enhance the ability of managers to make sound decisions for both short- and long- range strategic planning. Working as cohesive units situated at each ofthe Geographic Area and National Interagency Coordination Centers, Predictive Services will blend the functions of intelligence, fire management analysis, and meteorology for delivering decision support products and services in support of geographic area and national decision-making. The National Predictive Services Oversight Group (PSOG) provides management oversight and direction tothe National Predictive Services Program. The group coordinates, directs, and oversees the development and implementation of national program products and services, ensures the integrity and cohesiveness of program operations, arbitrates differences, and provides a venue for dialogue and deliberation in support ofa sustainable and effective program. The National Predictive Services staff works under the direction ofthe NICC Manager, with guidance from NMAC. Geographic Area Coordination Center Predictive Services staff work under the direction ofthe GACC manager, with guidance from the Geographic Area Coordinating Groups (GACG). National and GACC missions share importance; andas such, National and GACC Predictive Services work in unison to create and maintain products and services which provide value to users atall levels. Predictive Services is comprised of meteorologists, fuels and fire behavior analysts, intelligence coordinators, and officers at NICC and the GACCs. GACC managers and GACGs determine the need and allocation of positions within each GACC with input from National Predictive Service staff, the NICC Manager, and NMAC. International and Department of Defense Assistance The NICC serves asthe focal point for international assistance requested from NMAC either under existing agreements (https://www.nifc.gov/nicc/logistics/references.htm) orby theUS Department of State. The NICC also serves asthe focal point for any requests for assistance from the Department of Defense. Geographic Area Coordination Center Functional Responsibilities Each GACC manager will be responsible for managing the daily operation ofthe GACC and for resource allocations within their GA. Resource allocation will bein alignment with their GMAC and NMAC. The GACC manager may identify an additional point-of-contact (POC) inthe form of coordinator-on-duty (COD), duty officer and/or duty chief. Positioning and Movement of Resources Geographic Area Coordination Centers, in conjunction with NICC and local dispatch centers, are responsible for ensuring a coordinated response to wildland fire incidents and/orall-hazards incidents under the NRF or other appropriate authorities. GACCs mobilize and position resources (personnel, aircraft, supplies, and equipment) internally among local dispatch centers to meet existing and anticipated incident, preparedness, severity, wildland, and prescribed fire needs, regardless of geographic location or agency affiliation. Geographic Area Coordination Centers coordinate movement of resources within geographic area boundaries and allocate resources according to GMAC direction when competition for wildland fire resources occurs within the geographic area. Geographic Area
Coordination Centers will ensure adequate fire suppression capability for local and/or geographic area managers and enable sound planning and preparedness atall management levels. Geographic areas will establish priorities for their incidents and wildland fires and report them to NICC. Geographic Area Coordination Centers will notify NICC and adjoining GACCs ofthe commitment of national resources within their area and will notify the local dispatch offices and the NICC of geographic area drawdown decision and actions. Activities associated with the NRF will be accomplished utilizing established dispatch coordination procedures. The affected GACC will coordinate ordering points with the regional ESF #4 coordinator and the ESF #4 lead atthe appropriate Regional Response Coordination Centers (RRCC) and Joint Field Offices (JFO). Management of Aviation Resources Geographic Area Coordination Centers have established authorities and procedures for dispatching aviation resources. These procedures include: • Aircraft ordering protocols for fire, logistical and administrative flights; • Procedures for ordering agency-approved infrared (IR) mapping aircraft and UAS; • Procedures for tracking ofall aircraft within geographic area boundaries; • Mechanisms for disseminating availability and commitment status throughout the dispatch/coordination system; • Ordering and operational procedures between the GACC, dispatch center(s) and airtanker base(s); • Procedures for flight following (including protocols for use of Automated Flight Following (AFF) and initial call onthe National Flight Following frequency; • Procedures for ordering and establishing temporary flight restrictions (TFR) and operating guidelines for airspace deconfliction for military airspace (military training route [MTR], Special Use Airspace [SUA], Military Operations Area [MOA]) and Restricted Areas. Geographic Area Coordination Centers will participate in planned airspace meetings annually; • Procedures for ordering and utilization of Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) temporary towers; • Procedures for reporting through the SAFECOM system; and • Procedures for reporting drone intrusions. Predictive Services The GACC and/or Predictive Service managers will provide daily supervision of their respective Predictive Services programs, including developing GACC-specific operating plans. These plans will encompass the daily activities ofthe GACC Predictive Services program, including supervision, the flow of information within the GACC and geographic area, and the products produced for geographic area purposes. GACC and/or predictive service managers will have ultimate responsibility for ensuring GACC Predictive Services staff have the appropriate allocation of time and resources to produce required national products, including the National 7-Day Significant Fire Potential Outlook, the National Significant Wildland Fire Potential Outlook, and Fuels and Fire Behavior Advisories as needed. Local Dispatch Center Functional Responsibilities Local dispatch centers are responsible for initial attack dispatching, coordination of communications, intelligence gathering and dissemination, and logistical support for local incidents and field operations. Initial Attack Dispatching Local dispatch centers are the focal point for the report of, and initial response to wildland fires, and under appropriate authorities, other emergency incidents atthe local level. Deployment of response resources is made in accordance with local processes and procedures as outlined inthe dispatch center’s mobilization guide. Each dispatch office with the responsibility for initial response to wildland fires shall have a preplanned response plan that allocates resources tonew wildland fires in accordance with fire management direction, initial attack agreements, and established ordering procedures. The preplanned response plan will be reviewed and updated annually prior to fire season. Incident records will be created bythe dispatch center with delegated authority for the benefiting agency and associated Protecting Unit (https://www.nwcg.gov/publications/pms205) based onthe point of origin (POO) ofthe incident. Reference “jurisdictional unit” (https://www.nwcg.gov/publications/pms205) for additional information. Unique incident identifiers are the concatenation ofthe year from the fire discovery date/time, the POO protecting unit, and the local incident identifier. The year isnot exposed tothe user in most applications. Unique incident identifiers are referenced in user interface inthe following format: MT-FNF-000567. Incident data and all ordering for the incident is tracked under this unique designator for the life ofthe incident. Multiple event/records will notbe created when an incident burns onto or crosses jurisdictional boundaries. When duplicate records are inadvertently
created, every effort will be made to rectify by aligning incident and resource data associated with two records tothe correct record, the duplicate record will be updated toan invalid record. Additionally, each center will have a method to document actions taken and resources sent to wildland fires. Centers may use either a manual or computer-aided dispatch system. Each dispatch center shall have maps posted that depict initial attack response areas, land ownership, jurisdictional and protection boundaries, hazards, and resource concerns. Each center will also ensure that computer-aided dispatch (CAD) and geographic information system (GIS) products are current, functioning, and utilized. When an incident’sPOO ison unprotected lands (https://www.nwcg.gov/publications/pms205) or areas for which no fire organization has responsibility for management ofa wildfire authorized bylaw, contract, or personal interest ofthe fire organization (e.g., a timber or rangeland association), there are two acceptable rationales for local dispatch incident record creation: • The responding organization determines threat to protected lands. • The responding organization determines incident has already burned onto protected lands. Fire management direction/duty officer will determine if either criterion ismet and necessitates an incident record creation and subsequent response. In this instance, the responding organization’s Unit Identifiers (Unit ID) will be used for the protecting unit data element within the unique incident identifier. Dispatch centers will have protocols in place for frequency management, priority useof frequencies, and procedures for obtaining additional frequencies. Local dispatch centers will have protocols in place for monitoring, requesting, and disseminating fire weather forecasts, spot weather forecasts, fire weather watches, red flag warnings and other severe weather events (e.g., severe storm warnings, flash flood warnings, tornado warnings) to firefighters, incident commanders, and field- going personnel. The National Multi-agency Coordination Group has established incident name protocols. Guidance is found inthe National Interagency Standards for Resource Mobilization. All required reference material will be current and accessible, and expired orout-of-date material will be removed. Intelligence The intelligence function is responsible for gathering and disseminating incident, resource, weather, and predictive services information. Each dispatch center will ensure that locations and conditions ofthe fire weather stations are known, anda current weather station catalog is available. Weather data will be archived daily in WIMS and seasonal inputs will be maintained, including vegetative state, fuel moisture values, daily state ofthe weather observations, and updating breakpoints. • FS – Dispatch centers are required to have a person trained inthe National Fire Danger Rating System (NFDRS) assigned to data quality assurance responsibilities. Dispatch centers will ensure that coordination/communication with the local NWS Forecast Office occurs annually prior to fire season. Local dispatch centers will have a process in place for submission ofthe daily situation report and ICS-209s. Dispatch centers with websites will ensure current intelligence and weather information is posted. Expanded Dispatch and Incident Business Management Expanded dispatch isa functional branch ofthe Incident Support Organization (ISO) that supports incidents and expands as local fire conditions and activity dictates. Expanded dispatch is established when a high volume of activity indicates that increased dispatch and coordination capability is required. Each dispatch center will have an expanded dispatch operating plan which provides specific details about when, where, and how to implement an expanded dispatch. The plan will identify logistical support facilities available for expanded dispatch use. These facilities will be preidentified, procured, and available for immediate setup, along with necessary equipment. The expanded dispatch workspace will be separate from, but accessible to, the initial attack organization. The area should have adequate office space, including suitable lighting, heating/cooling systems, and security. Expanded dispatchers will have access to communications equipment, including telephones, fax machines, copiers, and computer hardware with adequate data storage space.
Qualified personnel should beon site in order to adequately staff required expanded dispatch functions. Expanded dispatch supervisors are responsible for establishing a staffing and operating schedule for expanded dispatch, including operational period changes, briefings, and strategy meetings. Aviation Each dispatch center will have documented procedures established for dispatching of aviation resources. These procedures will include: • Aircraft ordering protocols for fire, logistical, and administrative flights; • Procedures for ordering agency-approved IR mapping aircraft and UAS; • Procedures for disseminating availability and commitment status throughout the dispatch/coordination system; • Procedures for coordination with airtanker bases; • Procedures for airtanker, smokejumper, and rappeler use and restrictions; • Procedures for flight following (including protocols for use ofAFF and initial call onthe National Flight Following frequency); • Procedures for ordering and establishing TFRs; • Procedures for airspace de-confliction for military air space (MTR, SUA, MOA) and Restricted Areas, and current aviation flight hazard maps or Military Operating Area sectionals; • Procedures for requesting FAA temporary towers; • Procedures for reporting through the SAFECOM system; and • Procedures for reporting drone intrusions. Accident Notification When an accident occurs, agency notification requirements will be followed. As soon asthe accident is verified, the following should be notified: • Local dispatch center; • Unit fire management officer (FMO); and • Agency administrators. Additional notifications should occur inthe dispatch/coordination system, from the local dispatch center tothe NICC through the GACC. Incident Emergency Management Planning To achieve successful medical response, agency administrators will ensure that their units have completed the following items prior to each field season: • A medical emergency response plan that identifies medical evacuation options, local/county/State/Federal resource capabilities, capacities, ordering procedures, cooperative agreements, role of dispatch centers, and key contacts or liaisons; • Standardized incident and communication center protocols identified inthe “Medical Incident Report” section ofthe IRPG. • For incidents that require the preparation ofan incident action plan (IAP), Form ICS-206-WF will be used. Dispatch/Coordination Center Reference Material All coordination/dispatch centers will have reference materials available toall dispatchers. See appendix Lfor a list of minimum required reference materials. Training Dispatch/coordination center staff will be trained in, and follow established procedures for, the use of applications utilized in center operations. Personnel will be cross trained in each function (i.e., aircraft, crews, overhead, equipment, intelligence) in order to provide staffing coverage. Dispatch personnel will be trained inand follow center procedures for the following (as applicable): • Interagency Resource Ordering Capability (IROC); • Computer-aided dispatch (CAD); • Fire Code; • Automated Flight Following (AFF); • Unit Identifiers; • SIT Report/209; and • Other applications (e.g., WFDSS, e-ISuite).
All dispatch center employees will have a documentation file for current season training, past season fire training, certifications and experience, fire experience, performance evaluations, and have position task books initiated appropriate to their training needs. All supervisors will be familiar with safety and accident reporting processes (e.g., Safety Management Information System [SMIS], SAFENET, SAFECOM). All employees will have current incident qualification cards produced bythe Incident Qualifications and Certification System (IQCS) asper chapter 13. • BLM – BLM employees are required to complete the Fire and Aviation Employee Orientation Checklist (https://www.nifc.gov/standards/blm-preparedness-review). Facilities and Equipment All dispatch/coordination centers will have a telephone system with an adequate number of lines for normal business volume, and the capability to expand as conditions dictate. Centers will have teleconference capabilities commensurate with the anticipated volume of business. Copying, facsimile, computer, and GIS systems shall meet operational needs (quantity and capability) and comply with agency standards. Software will be compatible with information resource management and agency requirements for security. All facilities shall have an evacuation plan, security plan, and safety practices in place to safeguard the health and welfare of employees. Adequate facilities will be available to host an expanded dispatch or Multi-Agency Coordination (MAC) Group and shall include telephones, computer access, copiers, and basic office supplies. Rooms for MAC Group use will have adequate information technology (IT) equipment and support. All centers will have adequate workspace with room for reference materials and other necessary items to perform assigned duties. Individual workspace should be provided away from the initial attack floor for each permanent employee, anda break room area should be provided for employees. Employees will have access toa locked area to store data that may contain personally identifiable information (PII) or personal items. Radio Systems Radio systems will have an adequate number of frequencies to provide for separation of incidents and use byall interagency partners. Base station and repeater transmissions shall be recorded and maintained in accordance with agency records management policies. Radio systems may have alert tones available for use as determined by local center policies.

Appendix A Sample Questions for Fire Site Visits by Agency Administrators Management Direction Whois the incident commander? Ifthe fire is being managed under unified command, are all commanders present? Isthe incident operating smoothly? What isthe incident organization? What isthe current situation? What has been damaged oris at risk? Have you received adequate direction for the management ofthe incident? Isa Wildfire Decision Support System required/still valid? What are the incident management objectives? Constraints? Probability of success? Are the tactics inthe incident action plan realistic and achievable with current resources? Isa resource advisor needed? What are your estimates of suppression costs? What are the incident commander’s concerns? What are the local, social, economic, and political issues? Are there rehabilitation needs? What canI, asthe agency administrator, doto help? Safety What are your safety concerns? Are these concerns resolved? Ifnot, what needs tobe done? What isthe general safety attitude and emphasis? Have you assessed the potential hazardous situations and determined ifthe fire canbe fought safely? Have you applied the Fire Orders, Watch Out Situations, Lookout, Communication, Escape Routes, Safety Zones (LCES) process in selecting safe and effective strategies and tactics? Have you effectively briefed firefighters on hazards, safety zones, escape routes, and current and expected weather and fire behavior? Isthe safety officer position filled? Ifnot, howis this function being addressed? Are you monitoring work schedules to ensure adequate rest? Are you meeting the standard work/rest guidelines? Have you provided for adequate rest, food, water, and health services for all personnel? Are all the fire personnel qualified for the positions they hold, and are they physically able to perform? Have you had any injuries or accidents? Fire Suppression Operations What isthe fire weather forecast (present and extended)? What isthe fire behavior potential? Are fire personnel briefed on incident objectives, strategies, tactics, organization, communications, hazards, and safety principles? Are the strategy and tactics based on current and forecasted weather? Are the strategy and tactics safe, effective, and consistent with management’s objectives and accepted fire policies and procedures? Doyou have effective communication onthe incident and with dispatch? Are you monitoring weather and fire behavior to make needed adjustments to strategy and tactics? Are you using tactical aircraft? Doyou have an assigned air tactical group supervisor? Is aircraft use safe, effective, and efficient? Doyou have a temporary flight restriction (TFR)? Ifthe fire escapes initial attack, what will your role bein developing the Wildland Fire Decision Support System?
Administration Doyou have any administrative concerns? What arrangements have you made to complete time reports, accident forms, fire report, etc.? Did all orders and procurement go through dispatch? Doyou have any outstanding obligations? Are all rental agreements and use records properly completed? How did the fire start? If human-caused, hasan investigation been initiated to determine the cause and develop a trespass case? Doyou know ofany current or potential claims? Dispatch Office Isthe incident receiving fire weather and fire behavior information? Isthe incident getting the resources ordered ina timely manner? Is dispatch adequately staffed? What are the local, area, and national preparedness levels? Howdo they affect this fire? Are the elements identified atthe various preparedness levels being considered? What are the current local, area and national fire situations? What isthe priority of existing fires and how are the priorities being determined?
Appendix B Manager’s Supplement for Post-Incident Review Incident Commander Incident Name and Number Start Date and Duration of Incident Date of Incident Debriefing List of Debriefing Attendees: Brief synopsis of fire behavior and narrative ofthe incident: Fire Size-up: • Gave an accurate sizeup ofthe fire to dispatch upon arrival? • Managed fire suppression resources in accordance with the management objectives for the area and availability of resources? • Did the unit support organization provide timely response and feedback to your needs? (appendix A) • Were there any radio communication issues? Provide for the Safety and Welfare of Assigned Personnel: • Gave operation briefing prior to firefighters being assigned to incident operations. • How were incoming resources debriefed; via radio, personal contact? • Were agency work/rest guidelines followed? Was adequate food and water provided to firefighters? Fire Suppression Operations: • Explain how the strategies and tactics used met management objectives, without compromising adherence tothe Fire Orders, Watch Out Situations, and LCES. • How were weather conditions (daily weather briefings, spot weather forecasts or other) monitored? • Were there adjustments needed to strategy and tactics? • What were the potentially hazardous situations and their mitigations? • How were projected changes inthe weather, tactics, hazards, and fire behavior communicated to fire personnel? • Were communications effective with dispatch and supervisor? • Were all interested parties kept informed of progress, problems, and needs? Was aviation support used? Ifso, wasit effective? • Were there any injuries, close calls, or safety issues that should be discussed? Were these documented? Administrative Responsibilities: • Submitted complete documentation to supervisor for time, accidents, incident status, unit logs, evaluations, and other required or pertinent reports? • Provided timely and effective notification ofthe fire status and unusual events or occurrences to dispatch and management. • As requested, provided effective input into the Wildland Fire Decision Support System. • If necessary, provided team transition briefing as assigned. • Form ICS-201 was completed in accordance with local policy.

Appendix C Sample Delegation for Unit Fire Management Officers , Fire Management Officer for the (Unit) is delegated authority toact onmy behalf for the following duties and actions: 1. Represent the (Agency) inthe Multi-Agency Coordinating Group in setting priorities and allocating resources for fire emergencies. 2. Coordinate all prescribed fire activities inthe (Unit) and suspending all prescribed fire and issuance of burning permits when conditions warrant. 3. Ensure that only fully qualified personnel are used in wildland fire operations. 4. Coordinate, preposition, send, and order fire and aviation resources in response to current and anticipated zone fire conditions. 5. Oversee and coordinate the interagency dispatch center on behalf ofthe (Agency). 6. Request and oversee distribution of severity funding for Unit Fire and Aviation. 7. Approve Fire Program requests of overtime, hazard pay, and other premium pay. 8. Ensure all incidents are managed ina safe and cost-effective manner. 9. Coordinate and provide all fire and prevention information needs to inform internal and external costumers with necessary information. 10. Coordinate all fire funding accounts with the budget officer to assure unit fiscal guidelines are adhered toand targets are met. 11. Approve and sign aviation request forms. 12. Approve incident qualification cards in accordance with agency policy. 13. Authorized to hire emergency firefighters in accordance with the Administratively Determined (AD) Pay Plan for Emergency Workers (Casuals). Fire Management Officer Date Agency Administrator Date

Appendix D Agency Administrator’s Briefing to Incident Management Team Briefing Package for Incident Management Teams The purpose of this template isto provide a format and content outline for the host unit touse when briefing an incident management team (IMT). Some items will notbe relevant to some units; delete oradd additional information as needed. An optional outline is included for those units that would like touse WFDSS to conduct the IMT briefing. Overview for ALL Team Members • Introduction – Agency Administrator ○ Other Agencies and Cooperators • Objectives and Course of Action – Agency administrator /Fire Management Officer (FMO) (Use the Wildland Fire Decision Support System [WFDSS], as needed.) ○ Objectives Tab – Incident Objectives and Incident Requirements ○ Course of Action Tab – Overview of Strategic Direction • Situational Update – Assigned Incident Commander (IC) orFMO. (Use the WFDSS as needed.) ○ Fire Start Date and Cause ○ Situation Tab – Situational Overview  Analysis - Short-term, Near-term, and FSPro  Fire Environment and Safety - Est Ground Evacuation - Retardant Avoidance  Disturbance History (inthe area) - Historical Fires - Fuel Treatments  Fire Weather and Danger - Significant Fire Potential – Predictive Services - RAWS stations - Local Fire Environment Information (Fire Weather, Fire Behavior) – Localized Anomalies, Terrain Influences, Weather Patterns or Fire Behavior, Current and Predicted Fire Weather/Fire Behavior  Boundaries - Responsible/Jurisdictional Boundaries - Federal Boundaries - County  Designated Areas - Wilderness/Potential Wilderness - Special Designation - BLM – oil/gas/range/horse and burro  Infrastructure - Facilities - Communication - Energy - Roads and Trails  Natural and Cultural Resources - Air Quality - Critical Habitat - Sage Grouse Habitat  Other Considerations to Include: - Current Planning Area in Published Decision - Values at Risk – Or Other Considerations That Are Not In WFDSS - Resource Benefits – Explain Where Fire Is Beneficial onThe Landscape - Assessment Tab – Current Risks and Potential Benefits (Use WFDSS, as needed.)  Risk and Complexity Analysis  Benefits of Fire on This Landscape (Type of Fire, Where, When)
• Decision and Costs – Agency administrator orFMO (Use WFDSS, as needed.) ○ Cost Tab – Outline Cost Thresholds for Current Decision ○ Decision Tab – Review the Rationale ofthe Agency Administrator • Local Concerns – Agency administrator orFMO ○ Environmental, Social, Political, Economic ○ Law Enforcement or Investigations, If Applicable ○ Area Closures – Potential Impacts to Local Income, Outfitter Guides, Etc. ○ Initial Attack Responsibilities ○ Training Responsibilities – Inclusion of Local and Geographic Area Priority Trainees • Incoming IC Comments • Closing Remarks – Agency administrator ○ Agency administrator’sKey Points from Leader’s Intent ○ Breakout Group Meetings to Follow Breakout Groups Incident Commander Written Package Oral Briefing • Current and expected weather, fire behavior and fire danger • Delegation of authority • Leader’s intent • WFDSS decision document • Contact list • ICS-209 • IAP and map • Closure orders • Local wildfire guidance documentation • Heavy equipment policy • Medical evacuation protocol • Coordination of hazardous materials • Setup daily coordination calls between IC, agency administrator, (include others as needed) • Financial considerations/limitations • Other coordination expectations, such as adjoining agencies, Tribal consultation, elected officials • Local resource concerns (anadromous fish, cultural sites, timber, invasive species, etc.) ○ Resource advisor • Other incidents/incident management teams (IMTs) inthe area or geographic area • Hazardous materials ○ Unexploded ordnances, asbestos, mining contaminants, etc. Information Written Package Oral Briefing • Contact list information (phone number, roles, etc.) for appropriate agencies, elected officials, business leaders • Daily updates email list • Template for press releases • Local media contacts • Media guide • Joint Information Center (JIC) contact numbers • Local unit public information plan • IfJIC activated, how the IMT will interact • Expectations of public meetings, or coordinated outreach from the IMT • Public information plan within 24 hours Operations Written Package Oral Briefing • WFDSS decision ○ Management action point (MAP) ○ Course of action • Fire department contacts/resource list/availability ○ Provide structure protection guidance (as relative unit and adjoining ownership as needed) • Weather/fire danger information • Fire behavior models and predictions • Management action points ○ Trigger points or evaluation lines for tactical operations ○ Natural barriers • Structure protection guidance (overview from local perspective)
Written Package Oral Briefing ○ Evacuation plans and trigger points ○ Structure protection guidance • Contact list • Resource orders/resource list ○ Outgoing IC/Operations resource list – what ison order, what is assigned tothe fire currently, what still needs tobe ordered • Area maps/geospatial PDF map of fire area ○ Unit frequencies and repeater map ○ Retardant avoidance maps ○ Structure inventory data/maps ○ Values at risk maps if different than what isin WFDSS • Unit aviation briefing guide • Suppression rehabilitation plan • Mopup or rehabilitation standards/guidance • Turn back standards • Heavy equipment policy • Medical evacuation protocol • Unit identified hazards and potential mitigations (e.g., working in grizzly bear habitat, mining hazards, asbestos contaminated areas) • Coordination of hazardous materials • Spike camp vs. crew shuttle • Dozer line placement restrictions, recommendations, and requirements • Known structures with protection expectations • Initial attack responsibilities and procedures • Rehabilitation standards or expectations • Unit-identified hazards and potential mitigations (e.g., working in grizzly bear habitat, mining hazards, asbestos contaminated areas) Air Operations Written Package Oral Briefing • Aviation briefing guidance • Regional and local frequency guides • TFR maps • Frequency maps • Aviation hazard map • Unit helibase map • Retardant avoidance maps • Available aviation resources (on order andon loan) • Local airports and airstrips • Contact list (local air operations personnel and phone numbers) • Tactical resources (smokejumpers, agency administrator, airtankers) ordering process • Helibase locations used inthe past • Fuel – stationary and mobile • Helibase areas (proximity to fire) • Communication limitations • Helicopters available locally • Local weather issues (e.g., wind, smoke) • Restricted Areas (military, local flight paths, HARP, clear radar) • Known hazards • Housing for pilots • Retardant status • TFR • Retardant or water usage reporting requirements Safety Written Package Oral Briefing • Emergency Medical Field Evacuation Plan • Serious Accident and Incident Within the Incident Plan • Burn care facilities list • Accidents to date • Unit identified hazards (e.g., unexploded ordnances, bear baiting stations, mines, snag patches, extremely rough terrain, etc.)
Written Package Oral Briefing • Critical Incident Stress Management (CISM) Guidelines for Fire Management information sheet • CISM request form • Wildland Fire Fatality and Entrapment Initial Report form • Memorandum of Agreement between Department of Agriculture FSand DOI • Unit identified hazards and potential mitigations (e.g., working in grizzly bear habitat, mining hazards, asbestos contaminated areas) • Completed ICS-206 for area • Contact list • Unit protocol for communication of varying degrees of accidents o What level of notification does the agency administrator want? • Local medical plans, hospital locations, etc. Finance Section (Could be combined with Logistics) Written Package Oral Briefing • Unit incident business operating guidelines • Contracts and agreements ○ List ofall current agreements including land use agreements, fuel agreements, local purchase, equipment/resources agreements ○ Cell phone carrier information ○ Cost share agreements ○ Fire department cooperative fire agreements ○ Weed washing stations contract options • Compensation/claims requirements and contacts (hospital liaison) • Fiscal limitations and constraints • Identify incident business advisor (INBA) and contracting officer(s) • Buying unit • Contact list • Overview of local/cooperator agreements Logistics Section Written Package Oral Briefing • Incident map ○ Incident command post (ICP) camp locations – map ○ Drop points • Contracts ○ Cell phone carrier information ○ Weed washing stations contract options • Unit frequencies and repeater map • Medical information for area • Expanded dispatch highlights • Agreements ○ List ofall current agreements including land use agreement, fuel agreements, local purchase, equipment/resources agreements • Contact list • Medical information for the area – protocol • Availability of caterer or local restaurants for IMT/crews • Communication recommendations ○ Cell phone coverage (carriers) • Resource ordering – Interagency Resource Ordering Capability (IROC) access and orders • Known ground support issues ○ Rental car/vehicle availability • ICP/camp site recommendations (used in past) • Discussion of agreements
Planning Section Written Package Oral Briefing • Delegation of authority • Leader’s intent • WFDSS decision • 209/IAP email list • GIS contacts • ICS-209 • Resource list (IROC orders) • Weather, fire danger and current fuel moistures ○ Contacts for these products – local weather office, fuels specialist, etc. ○ Current spot weather forecast • Initial map and IAP • IROC orders/resource list • Contact list • Specific wildfire guidance documentation • Remote Automatic Weather System (RAWS) ordering • Infrared (IR) availability/ordering • Final product expectations ○ Narrative/executive summary (IMT) ○ Transition Plan (IMT) ○ Demobilization Plan (IMT/expanded dispatch) ○ Maps (IMT) ○ Documentation (IMT) – number of packages required ○ Hard drive (IMT) ○ Rehabilitation Plan (Area) ○ Evacuation Plan (Local) ○ Structure Protection Plan (Area/IMT) ○ Known sites update (IMT/Area) • Electronic data ○ FTP site posting directions or information repository (IMT hard drive) ○ GIS data ○ Known sites template • WFDSS documentation ○ Modeling support/products • ICS-209 deadlines, protocols for complexities, limited fires, etc. • Training responsibilities
Contacts Unit Name___________________________________ Area Name Job Title Work Phone # Alternate # Agency Administrator Agency Administrator Executive Assistant Fire Management Fire Management Officer Aviation Officer Dispatch Center Manager Asst. Dispatch Center Manager Initial Attack Dispatcher Administrative Representative Incident Business Specialist Unit Claims Liaison Budget Officer Resource Advisor Biologist Archeologist Archeologist Public Information Public Affairs Officer Safety Safety Officer Law Enforcement Patrol Captain Vehicles/Fleet Fleet Manager Information Systems GIS Coordinator Web Manager Hazmat Coordinator Engineer D1 District Ranger Fire Management Officer Office Manager Priority Trainee Program GATR Potential contacts include acquisition management (i.e., contracting specialists, purchasing agency, contracting officers, grants, and agreements); union representatives; human resources management (e.g., OWCP contacts); IT information (i.e., IROC/e-ISuite, customer helpdesk for agencies involved). Regional and Interagency Potential contacts may include hospital liaison(s), incident business coordinator and buying team coordinator, regional contracting specialist (VIPR), regional contractor liaison, State Department of Transportation, State troopers, State land office area manager, local law enforcement, electric/power company, etc.
Appendix E Sample Delegations of Authority Agency Administrator toIMT and Leader’s Intent Delegation of Authority Colorado State Office Montrose Field Office Asof 1800, May20, 2005, I have delegated authority to manage the Crystal River Fire, Number E353, San Juan Resource Area, to Incident Commander Bill Jones and his incident management team. The fire, which originated as four separate lightning strikes occurring onMay 17, 2005, is burning inthe Crystal River Drainage. My considerations for management of this fire are: 1. Provide for firefighter and public safety. 2. Manage the fire with as little environmental damage as possible. 3. Key cultural features requiring priority protection are: 4. Key resources considerations are: 5. Restrictions for suppression actions include: 6. Minimum tools for use are: 7. My agency resource advisor will be: 8. The fire borders are: 9. Manage the fire cost-effectively for the values at risk. 10. Provide training opportunities for the resources area personnel to strengthen our organizational capabilities and work with the geographic area training representative (GATR) to identify opportunities for priority trainees. 11. Minimum disruption of residential access to private property, and visitor use consistent with public safety. 12. Efforts should be made to minimize some impacts to communities and ensure that communication is maintained with the State air quality bureau. Signature and Title of Agency Administrator Date Amendment to Delegation of Authority The delegation of authority dated May20, 2005, issued to Incident Commander Bill Jones for the management ofthe Crystal River Fire, number E353, is hereby amended as follows. This will be effective at 1800, May22, 2005. 13. Key cultural features requiring priority protection are: 14. Useof tracked vehicles authorized to protect Escalante Cabin. Signature and Title of Agency Administrator Date
Delegation of Authority for Incident Name Date: To: Incident Commander – Name ofIC From: Jurisdictional Agencies Subject: Incident Number and jurisdictional unit Effective at XXXX hours on Provide the Date, you are delegated authority for the management ofthe XXXX incident onthe XXXX Jurisdictional unit – include other jurisdictions if needed. You have full authority for incident management activities on this/these jurisdiction(s) within the framework oflaw, agency policies, and direction provided within the delegation of authority, Wildland Fire Decision Support System Decision, the Leader’s Intent letter (optional) and the team briefing package provided. This delegation carries with itthe full authority for the management ofthe resources (personnel and equipment), costs, and rehabilitation of incident management efforts directly associated with this incident(s). Your primary responsibility isto organize, manage and direct your assigned resources for safe, efficient and effective management ofthe incident. You are accountable tothe agency administrator or designated representative. Agency Administrator Date/Time Agency/Jurisdictional Unit Agency Administrator Date/Time Agency/Jurisdictional Unit I accept this delegation: Incident Commander Date/Time
Leader’s Intent This isan optional document with the following information provided asa template. The purpose isto provide information toan IMT that isnot directly related tothe strategic direction for managing a wildfire (strategic direction belongs inthe WFDSS Decision). Some items will notbe relevant to your unit; delete oradd additional information as needed. Items italicized and underlined are areas where you should review the information and either add unit-specific information or delete those statements. Overview This leader’s intent document isone piece of many components ofthe entire briefing package provided tothe incident management team (IMT). In addition to this leader’s intent letter, the IMT will also receive the following documentation to support the management of this incident: • Delegation of authority • Published decision from the Wildland Fire Decision Support System • Briefing package Communications Itis expected we will meet daily oras needed tobe informed on significant accomplishments or issues. Daily discussion points include but aren’t limited tothe following: • Safety • Other identified values at risk • Risk trade-offs • Relationships with partners and stakeholders • External communication • Operational effectiveness (your assessment of likelihood of success of achieving all objectives) • Benchmarks based on team capabilities, span of control, daily progress • Complexity • Cost • Ramp-upand ramp- down strategies o Final fire package Expect to have a preliminary team evaluation atthe incident closeout anda final evaluation atthe endof fire season when all incident business transactions have been finalized. Expanded dispatch isin place, please coordinate and work through XX Expanded Dispatch Center located atthe interagency communication center for additional resources or support needs. Strategic Planning Successful management of this fire requires a common understanding ofthe values that require protection, their priority for protection, the probability they will be impacted, under what circumstances they require protection, what protection might look like, and how we manage our response. Strategic direction is aligned with the land and resource management plan (L/RMP), resource management plans and associated amendments as detailed inthe WFDSS decision. Itis expected that you and your necessary staffs read and follow the decision (incident requirements, incident objectives, course of action, rationale) in WFDSS. Ifyou have questions or concerns, contact me directly to discuss or clarify. The team should assist with the following: • Keep line officer informed of significant accomplishments/issues of which canbe documented inthe periodic assessment throughout the duration ofthe incident. • Through your risk assessment process, provide feedback regarding needed changes tothe incident objectives and course of action to mitigate unnecessary risk to firefighters. • Provide input regarding any other identified values tobe addressed in planning operations andin the WFDSS decision. • Provide input tothe current risk and complexity analysis (RCA) in WFDSS and the need for updates; RCA updates canbe made to document changed conditions without publishing anew decision. • Provide support in updating and revising the decision as necessary, and/or determining ifan update to components ofthe decision or documentation is needed (e.g., expectation that the planning area will be breached). • Develop, update, and revise management action points as necessary to protect identified values (e.g., structural inholdings, communication sites, culturally sensitive areas) (The unit can list values here or refer to WFDSS).
Throughout the life ofthe incident there will likely be oral discussions, agreements, or changes in tactics/management ofthe fire asa whole that deviate from this letter orthe WFDSS Decision documentation. Such deviations must be discussed with mein person so that wecan determine solutions and update the WFDSS Decision as needed. Human Resources • All personnel assigned shall be treated with dignity and respect. Manage the human resources assigned tothe fire ina manner that promotes a positive and harassment-free work environment and creates a “no tolerance” atmosphere for harassment, alcohol, or illegal drug use. • All personnel assigned should receive evaluations prior to leaving the incident. Encourage supervisors to provide meaningful feedback regarding performance and conduct. Safety • Visitor and public safety isa concern. ○ Provide timely information to publics impacted bythe fire/closure areas. ○ Coordinate closures/evacuations with law enforcement as identified inthe briefing package. ○ If needed, utilize the appropriate cooperative law enforcement agreement inthe briefing package. • Coordinate and consult with safety and health manager or designated agency representative as identified inthe briefing package. • Coordinate hazardous material matters with unit safety officer. Specific information has been included inthe briefing package. • Camp security is advised dueto base camp’s proximity to town. • Known safety hazards within the proximity ofthe fire area, e.g., grizzly bear baiting station atXX location, grizzly habitat (considerations for camp, spike camps, night operations), large-standing snag patch from fire, trees are severely weakened, excessively steep terrain (provide a geographical location) with large rock outcrops andno values of concern. Operations Attention to firefighter and aviation safety isan absolute necessity! Incident action plans should reflect leader’s intent for the incident. Tactical actions will be assessed, and effective mitigation measures will bein place to avoid putting firefighting personnel at unnecessary risk; Consider not implementing tactical actions by assessing the value being protected versus the risk (even if mitigated) required to protect it. • Structure Protection ○ Ensure firefighters who engage in structure protection are staying within their tactical training, capabilities, and agency policies. ○ Document significant issues for values at risk within the ICS-209. ○ Utilize the community and structure fire protection guidelines (refer to your local guidance if relevant). • Retardant ○ Review the fire-retardant-avoidance maps and documentation provided during the IMT in-brief orin WFDSS, and coordinate with the lead resource advisor as identified inthe briefing package. ○ Follow reporting guidelines for retardant useas defined inthe briefing package. ○ Follow the guidance/protocol within the wildfire guidelines for resource protection if retardant is misplaced. ○ Use retardant only when and where itis expected tobe successful in slowing fire spread or reducing intensities so ground firefighters may engage the fire more safely with a higher likelihood of success. • Aviation ○ Aviation safety isa high priority. An aviation risk assessment will be completed onall aviation missions in support of fire management. For additional guidance regarding aviation resources or local protocol refer tothe briefing package and work with the unit aviation officer or their designee asa liaison. ○ An initial temporary flight restriction (TFR) has been established for the fire area, coordinate changes tothe current TFR with the unit aviation officer. • Initial Attack Operations ○ You will be responsible for initial attack activities within your designated TFR. ○ The local unit may call upon you for additional support as needed for initial attack activities. • Natural and Cultural Resource Protection and/or Enhancement ○ Avoid damage to sensitive natural and cultural resources within the fire area; coordinate suppression actions with the lead resource advisor. Specific natural and cultural resource information has been included within the briefing package.
○ Ensure all tactical actions adhere tothe unit wildfire guidelines for resource protection and develop a rehabilitation plan for the impacts associated with those actions. ○ Not all wildfire is detrimental in this planning area. Specific strategic direction is provided inthe WFDSS decision. Public Information • Develop a public information plan for the incident within XX hours and work closely with the unit public affairs specialist to disseminate information to internal staff, external partners, and interested publics. Refer tothe briefing package for names and contacts. • Accuracy and timeliness of public information is important. Public meetings should be held as needed andon a routine basis. • Maintain contact with appropriate agencies, elected officials, business leaders and members ofthe public as identified within the briefing package. • Informational meetings or briefings and news releases areto be coordinated with the agency representatives as identified within the briefing package. Finance • Document decisions that have incident cost ramifications within theIC daily log and provide clear rationale for the decisions. • Utilize theXX Incident Business Plan; please work with the designated incident business advisor (INBA) for the incident. Refer tothe briefing package for contact information. • A buying team isin place, XX Dispatch Center. • Develop a total cost projection for managing the incident in line with the strategic direction provided for Federal lands, this needs tobe completed within XX hours of being delegated authority. • Provide assistance in developing a cost share agreement as mutually agreed upon bythe XX jurisdictions involved. Logistics • Telecommunications contracts have been previously established with Verizon for phone and data plans to support IMT base camps. Specific information is included within the briefing package. • The local unit has previously identified base camp and spike camp locations, please evaluate these areas before establishing new locations. Land use agreements for these sites arein place, coordinate with the incident business advisor for specific information. • Maps of these areas will be provided within the briefing package. ○ Invasive and noxious weeds – Vehicle and equipment washing is required on fires within XX area. Insert localized information. Refer to wildfire guidelines for resource protection onthe local unit for additional information (provided with the briefing package). Please direct questions tothe assigned resource advisor. Other oTo build capacity, the use of trainees is strongly suggested tobe incorporated into team functions where available. Local trainees will receive first priority for assignments. A list ofthe local trainees is included within the briefing package. o Work with the geographic area training representative (GATR) to identify opportunities for priority trainees. o Coordinate and work closely with the following positions/personnel – contact information as well additional contacts maybe found inthe briefing package. ○ Line officer ○ District FMO/unit FMO ○ Unit aviation officer ○ Interagency dispatch center manager ○ Public affairs officer ○ Unit safety officer ○ Incident business advisor ○ Resource advisor ○ Agency/interagency partners ○ Other IMTs inthe adjoining area
____________________________ _________________ Line Officer Signatory Date ____________________________ _________________ Optional signatures addif needed Date ____________________________ _________________ Incident Commander Date
Appendix F Local Incident Commander Briefing toIMT The Incident Briefing (ICS-201) form provides the basis for the local incident commander to brief the incoming team. Briefing Information Forms available or attached: Other Attachments: ICS-201 ICS-215 Map of Fire ICS-207 ICS-220 Aerial Photos ICS-209 Weather Forecast Fire start date: Time: Fire cause: Fuels ahead of fire: Fuels at fire: Fire behavior: Fire spread: Natural barriers: Anchor points: Perimeter secured, control/mitigation efforts taken, and containment status: Life, improvements, resources, and environmental issues: Weather forecast: Established Possible ICP: Base: Camp(s): Staging area(s): Copy machine available? YesNo
Safety issues: EMSin Place: YesNo Air operations effectiveness to date: Air-related issues and restrictions: Hazards (aircraft and people): Access from base to line: Personnel and equipment on incident (status and condition): Personnel and equipment ordered: Cooperating and assisting agencies on scene: Helibase/helispot location: Crash fire protection at helibase: Medivac arrangement: Communication system inuse: Radio Telephone Cell Phone Water availability: Review of incident action plan; copy of approved Wildland Fire Decision Support System published decision: Smoke conditions: Local political issues: Damage assessment needs: Security problems:
Appendix G Sample Delegation – Lessons Learned Review (LLR) Memorandum To: LLR Facilitator; [Title of person/office this is meant for] From: Delegating Official Subject: Delegation of Authority – [Incident name] LLR Situation Summary: You are hereby designated the authority to lead and conduct a lessons learned review (LLR) for [Incident name]. The review process will begin at [Identify LLR start time, date, and location]. The fire staff and fire management office have identified the group of employees who will also be participating. That information will be provided toyou upon your arrival. You have the authority to tailor your team and the LLR process tofit the situation and your style of facilitation. However, I would like youto utilize the guidance outlined inthe Interagency Standards for Fire and Fire Aviation Operations chapter 18, while conducting the LLR. This includes: • Convening the participants; • Identifying facts ofthe event and developing a chronological narrative ofthe event; • Identifying underlying reasons for success or failure; • Identifying what was learned and what should/could be done differently inthe future; • Identify any recommendations that would prevent future similar occurrences; and • Providing a final, written report covering the above items, which isdue tome within two weeks ofthe event occurrence. Ifyou need any assistance, your primary contact will be [Name of primary contact]. Thank you for your time and assistance.

Appendix H Recommendations for Incident Emergency Medical Services Resource Initial Attack <250 People 250to 500 People > 500 People Medical Unit Leader (MEDL) NoTBD byIC and jurisdictional agency YES (1) YES (1) First Responder or Basic FAYes YesN/AN/A MEDL EMTs NoNo 12 EMTs NoTo be determined bythe ICor jurisdictional agency 12 MEDL Quals N/AN/A310-1 Basic EMT 310-1 Basic EMT Med Unit EMT Quals N/A Basic EMT 310-1 Basic EMT 310-1 Basic EMT EMTs per Division N/ATo be determined in consultation with operations and/or medical unit Tobe determined in consultation with operations and/or medical unit Tobe determined in consultation with operations and/or medical unit Establish Local Medical Direction N/ATo be determined bythe ICor jurisdictional agency Yes Yes First Aid Kits Pocket and vehicle first aid kits Pocket, vehicle and crew first aid kits Pocket, vehicle and crew first aid kits Pocket, vehicle and crew first aid kits Incident Medical Support Kit1 NoTo be determined bythe ICor jurisdictional agency Yes Yes AEDTo be determined bythe ICor jurisdictional agency Tobe determined bythe ICor jurisdictional agency Yes Yes Oxygen NoNo TBD Yes OTC Medication NoTo be determined in consultation with safety officer, medical unit leader, and finance section chief Tobe determined in consultation with safety officer, medical unit leader, and finance section chief Tobe determined in consultation with safety officer, medical unit leader, and finance section chief Emergency Transport N/A Method to provide transport tothe nearest medical facility isto be identified inthe incident action plan Method to provide transport tothe nearest medical facility isto be identified inthe incident action plan Method to provide transport tothe nearest medical facility isto be identified inthe incident action plan 1Reference ETC-EB-2019-01, Medical Kit Changes for 2019 Field Season. NOTE: Regional differences/protocols exist that vary from these recommendations and may require a higher level ofEMS service. Examples of regional differences/protocols are: 1) Northern Rockies (Incident Medical Specialist Program); 2) Pacific Northwest (Incident Medical Specialist Program); and3) Alaska (Firemedic Program).

Appendix I Sample Delegation of Authority – FAST Delegation of Authority Geographic Area Fire and Aviation Safety Team (FAST) Situation summary (issues and concerns/reason for ordering the FAST): Objectives (measurable): Team skills required (per objectives listed above): The final team composition will be determined at time of dispatch and members named onthe resource order. Mission The FAST isto conduct an independent assessment and evaluation of operational and managerial activities (related tothe specific objectives stated above) atthe following locations (mission segments): The team may determine visits to other incidents/organizations/operations as appropriate and may doso after coordination with the Geographic Multi-agency Coordinating Group (GMAC). The FAST will contact the GMAC Coordinator (describe frequency of contact): The FAST isto provide technical or managerial assistance when requested and where necessary to immediately correct an identified, critical problem. The FAST may also provide short-term assistance in managing situations or incidents when requested bythe incident, organization, or operation. Protocols The FAST will organize and conduct an entry briefing with the appropriate managers ofthe locations/incidents identified previously. The entry briefing will provide the objectives and operational parameters ofthe mission. Once the mission segment is completed, the FAST will organize and conduct an exit briefing with the same officials or their designees, during which a draft ofthe mission-segment report will be presented and discussed. Components of this report will include: • Purpose and objectives • Findings, commendations, and recommendations • Follow-up actions needed • Immediate • Long-term • Scope (local, area, national) • Copy ofthe delegation of authority The FAST will contact the GMAC Coordinator . FAST will provide a final written report tothe GMAC Coordinator upon completion ofall mission segments. This report will include: • FAST final report outline • Executive summary • Purpose and objectives • Summary (findings, recommendations, commendations, assistance provided) • Critical and immediate follow-up actions required • Introduction • Methods and procedures • Mission segments (summary of incidents, organizations, operations reviewed; include copies of mission segment reports)
• Analysis • Findings and trends, commendations, and recommendations • Follow-up actions needed • Immediate • Long-term • Scope (local, area, national) • A copy ofthe delegation of authority The Multi-Agency Coordination Group hereby charters and delegates the preceding authority to , FAST Leader, effective on . /s/ Chair, Coordinating Group Date:
Appendix J Area Command (AC) Complexity Assessment Guide for ACT Engagement Incident: Date: Check all that apply. (Current date/time and expected over next 72-96 hours.) FACTORS YESNO Multiple incident management organizations (IMTs of varying types) are assigned ona single administrative unit or several adjoining units that canbe combined into a single area command. Local resources and managers need incident management assistance for multi-jurisdictional incidents that may/will incur a unified command organization and/or cost share agreements; maybe single incident with multiple IMTs. Response trends, and/or planning level, political, media, or public concerns are escalating from local to state/regional level and may rise to national levels (e.g., PLs, military activation, FEMA and/or FMAG involvement). Incident reporting or communication requirements are diverse, time-sensitive, and/or require consolidation and clarity. Incident personnel are having difficulty achieving objectives. Intricate local land and resource management objectives and constraints exist and require close oversight for compliance. Special circumstances that warrant additional management oversight and support (including but not limited to serious injuries, fatalities, equipment accidents, special non-fire events happening locally) are occurring/impacting agency oversight. Key unit leadership (agency administrators, LOs, agency reps, FMOs, etc.) is absent, operating beyond scope of training/experience, or multiple acting/detailed members are present/needed. Fatigue of these individuals is becoming a factor and will not improve for some time. Significant events (e.g., severe weather, large public events, substantial increase of initial attack) are predicted that will impact success. Complex, long-term, or multiple incidents are exceeding acceptable agency administrator and fire program manager span of control. Multiple incidents and administrative units are competing for resources. Incident prioritization, allocation of scarce resources, coordinating the sharing of critical resources, and application and management of surge resources can reduce competition and facilitate more efficient operations. A theater of operations concept is present inthe thinking, planning, and operational choices of decision makers. A greater commitment to long-term strategy/planning is warranted to better utilize resources and manage incidents. TOTAL 0-2YES ACT may notbe required, but can be ordered ifYES items are significant 3-6YES Consider ordering ACT: ifnot, monitor indicators closely and reconsider if additional YES indicators are noted 6+ YES ACT recommended

Appendix K Wildland Fire Decision Support System Information Disclaimer: The Wildland Fire Decision Support System (WFDSS) platform was updated and replaced by WFDSS NextGen on March 26, 2025. Updates to terminology and application processes with WFDSS NextGen is being developed and will be released inthe 2026 version ofthe Red Book. Information about WFDSS NextGen canbe found at https://wfdss.firenet.gov/help/Content/Home.htm. WFDSS Overview The Wildland Fire Decision Support System (WFDSS) isan interagency, web-based application that helps agency administrators and fire managers make risk-informed decisions for all types of wildland fires, regardless of complexity. WFDSS integrates the various applications used to manage incidents into a single risk-informed, collaborative system to streamline the analysis and reporting processes, providing one decision documentation system tiered to land and/or resource management plans. WFDSS Account Information The WFDSS application is intended for use bythe US Federal Government for managing wildland fires. Qualified users (Federal and Tribal employees and non-Federal WFDSS partners) can request accounts onthe WFDSS Production (for live incidents) or Training (training incidents only) login pages (https://wfdss.usgs.gov/wfdss_help/WFDSSHelp_request_acct.html) anda single account provides access to each system. Federal accounts are granted automatically, non-Federal accounts are granted by geographic area editor (GAE) or national editors (NE), depending on with which the geographic area a user’s account is associated. (Note: Each Federal entity has different overlapping regions which may not coincide with geographic areas. AGAE from a perceived different geographic area may assist youas a result.) Users work with GAEs, NEs, and the Interagency Incident Applications (IIA) Help Desk to manage disabled accounts. Additional information forre-enabling a disabled account is available at WFDSS Help. WFDSS User Roles User roles in WFDSS correspond to permissions which allow users to perform certain tasks within the application. Newly activated accounts are assigned a viewer role; but within the application, users can request author, dispatcher, data manager, or fire behavior specialist roles as necessary. Various support roles exist as well and include GAE, NE, administrator, and Help Desk. User role requests are granted by GAEs and NEs, depending onthe geographic area and role requested. • Users assigned the viewer role can view published content but can only engage in incident documentation if assigned incident privileges. • The author role is required for users to create and/orown incidents and manage the decision documentation process. • The dispatcher and data manager roles are typically designated atthe local level to manage an administrative unit’s incident information and spatial data. • The fire behavior specialist role canbe requested/granted when a certain degree of fire behavior analysis training has been completed (training and experience culminating inS-491 and S-495). • The GAE role isa primary support role for authors, dispatchers, data managers, and fire behavior specialists; users assigned this role have implicit ownership of incidents within their geographic area, regardless of agency. Additional information about GAE duties is included inthe WFDSS “Training and Support” section. • TheNE role has maximum authority relative to WFDSS incident management; users assigned this role have implicit ownership ofall incidents in WFDSS. The WFDSS user roles help topic (https://wfdss.usgs.gov/wfdss_help/index.htm) provides additional information about user roles. WFDSS Incident Privileges Incident privileges are assigned and managed by incident owners atthe time of (and are specific to) an incident. These privileges allow users toown, edit, review, or approve decision content. Users must be assigned the author user role toown incidents, but users with any role can edit, review, or approve decisions. Ifa change in incident privileges is necessary foran incident, contact the incident owner(s) to coordinate the change. Incident privileges
and managing incident privileges provide additional information canbe accessed through the WFDSS “Help” feature. WFDSS Training and Support A variety of WFDSS training (https://wfdss.usgs.gov/wfdss/WFDSS_Training.shtml) and support materials (modeling and decision learning resources, videos and various white papers and supporting documents; https://wfdss.usgs.gov/wfdss/WFDSS_Resources.shtml) are located onthe WFDSS home page. The “Hot Picks” section (https://wfdss.usgs.gov/wfdss/WFDSS_Home.shtml) provides links to annual refresher materials as well asthe most common WFDSS-related offerings. Within the WFDSS application, the online help (https://wfdss.usgs.gov/wfdss_help/index.htm) isa comprehensive setof help topics that are mapped to corresponding pages inthe application. Click the help icon inthe upper right ofany page to access specific help information for any page inthe application. Geographic Area Editors Support of WFDSS Users, Incidents, and Agencies Geographic area editors (GAE) are another source of WFDSS training and support. Their primary role isto support WFDSS users and incidents within their geographic area (GA), serve as interagency technical experts, and point of contacts (POC) for their agency or bureau. GAEs from various agencies are typically designated within each GA. GAEs work cooperatively for the benefit ofall users within their GAand are both able and expected to assist any caller from any agency within their GA. Geographic Area Editors WFDSS Duties • Grants and removes user roles (viewer, author, dispatcher, fire behavior specialist, and data manager) inthe training and production systems within their GA. ○ Serves asa WFDSS expert to support WFDSS users within their GA. ○ Assists or otherwise provides oversight inthe development of decision content for WFDSS decisions. ○ Provides “WFDSS POC” technical help during off hours and weekends. ○ Provides training and answers technical “howto” questions. • Provides incident support within their GAsas needed, and when an incident owner is unavailable. Geographic area editors can: ○ Edit any WFDSS incident within their GA, in coordination with incident owners, editors, and/or approving official(s); ○ Develop and share filters (groups, incident, analysis, and intelligence); ○ Upload incident and/or analysis shapefiles; ○ Transfer/modify incident ownership; ○ Grant incident privileges; and ○ Edit jurisdictional point of origin (in coordination with local unit and incident). • Serves as geographic area POC for their agency or bureau. ○ Facilitates interagency cooperation and coordination in support of multijurisdictional incidents and field users. ○ Consults fire and resource management staff and agency leadership as needed on WFDSS decision content. ○ Coordinates with and provides backup to other GAEs within their GA. ○ Disables agency/bureau user accounts within their GA. ○ Disseminates technical information, such as upgrades tothe WFDSS system, “howto” guidance, and training materials/announcements. ○ Participates inGAE calls to keep upto date on system changes or other relevant information tobe shared with field units. ○ Assists with the reactivation of disabled accounts within their GA. When a user with a disabled account contacts aGAE, theGA can assign the user a role in WFDSS production that automatically synchronizes with the user’s training account. Geographic Area Editors WFDSS Limitations • Donot have privileges specific to fire behavior specialist, administrator, or Help Desk. • Cannot view disabled accounts for users in other GAs. Fire Behavior Analysis Fire behavior analysis is incorporated into WFDSS, inthe form ofthe fire spread probability model (FSPro), basic fire behavior (Basic), short-term fire behavior (STFB), and near-term fire behavior (NTFB). A comparison of these
models (as well as FlamMap and FARSITE) canbe found onthe WFDSS homepage under the Training menu option (https://wfdss.usgs.gov/wfdss/WFDSS_Training.shtml), “Modeling Learning Resources” section. WFDSS users assigned the fire behavior specialist (FBS) role are responsible for fulfilling analysis needs for incidents. FBSs canbe local, assigned to incident management teams inthe form of LTANs or FBANs, or provide assistance remotely. Identifying local FBSs preseason to understand the local capacity for analysis assistance is helpful. Ifa local FBSis not available to provide analysis foran active incident, request assistance by selecting “Fire Behavior Request” from the “Information” tabof an incident and submitting the request (GAEs monitor these requests for their units), contacting aGAE directly, or calling the Analysis and Decision Content Support number (208-387-5253) listed onthe WFDSS home page. Additional information about requesting assistance foran incident canbe found onthe “Decision Support” section ofthe Wildland Fire Management Research, Development and Application group home page (https://wfmrda.nwcg.gov/). For fire analyses in Alaska, donot submit a "Fire Behavior Request" through WFDSS. Contact the Alaska Interagency Coordination Center - Fire Behavior Analyst (907-356-6573) to request assistance. Relative Risk Assessment The relative risk assessment is required before publishing a decision foran incident. The relative risk assessment assists agency administrators and fire managers in planning for, assessing, and managing your incidents. Incident owners or editors can perform the assessment, which provides a quick but comprehensive risk assessment This qualitative process canbe completed in less time than a quantitative long-term risk assessment. The Relative Risk Assessment chart uses three risk components: • values • hazard • probability Each of these components is assessed independently. Asthe graphs for each component are completed, document thoughts/reasons for inputs inthe accompanying text boxes. Text and graphs automatically populate into the WFDSS decision. The three outputs are then evaluated ina final step that provides the relative risk rating for the fire. From the relative risk rating, guidance is provided within the system to assist the owner/author in determining the level of analysis needed, considerations for the incident and documentation ofthe decision. The help topics “About Relative Risk” and “Calculating Relative Risk” (https://wfdss.usgs.gov/wfdss_help/index.htm) provide additional information. Organization Assessment The organization assessment (OA) is required to publish a decision foran incident guides agency administrators in their incident management organization selection, both in escalating and moderating situations (i.e., this process canbe used to expand or contract organizations). TheOA is based on relative risk, implementation difficulty, and socio- political concerns. The final part ofthe OA combines these variables to allow users to select the level of incident management needed. The help topic “Organization Assessment Reference” provides additional information. Incident KMZ Incident KMZ files (left menu) canbe downloaded to include allof the incident spatial data and completed analyses from the published decision(s). The spatial data is composed of incident and analysis shapes found inthe incident and analysis map layers onthe situation map. Shapes include planning areas, fire perimeters, management action points, incident objective shapes, analysis outputs, and analysis ignition files. Ifa decision is pending, only spatial information available toall users will be provided inthe KMZ. WFDSS Suggested Refresher and Preseason Items Units should provide annual WFDSS refreshers toall individuals that maybe involved in incident decision-making and documentation. agency administrators and fire managers should also identify individuals assigned the fire behavior specialist role in WFDSS to understand a unit’s capacity for providing analysis products andto identify future analysts for training and exposure come fire season. "WFDSS refresher training recommendations are located inthe “WFDSS Refreshers” section ofthe WFMRD&A webpage. Additional refresher information canbe found onthe WFDSS home page (Training and Related References menu options; annual refresher documents, inHot Picks) and from GAEs. Suggested minimum duration for review istwo hours. The following items are covered in annual WFDSS refreshers: • Strategic Objectives and Requirements – briefly review what is currently preloaded in WFDSS, discuss if there is conflicting information within the same strategic objective (SO) or fire management unit (FMU), and
evaluate what fire management options canbe utilized within each SO/FMU. Determine if edits are needed to update the information currently in WFDSS. • Relative Risk – canbe visited preseason to define some local inputs. • Boundary Fires – discuss, with interagency partners, how fires will be managed along boundaries. Utilize a fire scenario for this discussion if possible and work through the WFDSS process. • Unit Fire Planning – review planning-related shapes associated to ensure they are still applicable andto identify potential needs for one or more other unit shapes. • Fire Scenario – utilize WFDSS training to develop oneor more fire scenarios and guide corresponding discussions. Utilize a fire scenario that is somewhat complex and includes interagency partners. ○ Planning Area – draw a planning area with dialogue around howto draw itand what to include within it. ○ Values Inventory – review the values inventory derived from drawing the planning area. Document missing values, ifany, and determine if shapes are available to represent them. ○ Situation Map/Tab – review available map layers and the data they contain, and check system preferences to ensure that all applicable map layers are available for viewing. ○ Relative Risk and Organizational Assessment – complete this process making notes of what various elements were rated and why. ○ Incident Objectives/Incident Requirements – write them for the scenario. Review to ensure they address the “what,” “when,” “where,” and “why” to communicate leader’s intent and indicate priority. ○ Course of Action – develop a course of action that further explains leader’s intent, the priorities for the incident, andas needed, what notto do. ○ Scenarios – asthe above information is developed, discuss the potential scenarios and document those actions not taken inthe assessment or rationale. ○ Rationale – draft the rationale to include “My decision is…” information. This isthe executive summary ofthe document. Consider documenting what is allowed inthe management plan, the probability of being successful, the expected duration, and what was considered but rejected. The “Rationale” section provides a list of items to consider addressing and discussing. ○ If interagency partners are not involved inthe scenario, discuss who, when, and how they would have been involved during an incident. • Fire Behavior Models ○ Discuss the various models (FSPro, NTFB, STFB, basic) and how anyof them might be utilized to inform decision content. ○ Review the values at risk information provided bythe models and how it varies from the values inventory. ○ Discuss how the models might be utilized to answer what types of questions (practice forming the questions first, and then determining which modeling tool would provide the best answer). ○ Review products previously utilized bythe unit to evaluate risk ona fire or assist with decision-making.
L-1 Appendix L Dispatch Reference Dispatch Center Local Mobilization Guide/Dispatch Operating Plan The dispatch local mobilization guide/operating plan will contain or provide reference tothe following elements and procedures. These elements or procedures may exist in other plans or references inthe local dispatch office. • Organization ○ Chain-of-command/table of organization for the center, local agencies and cooperators ○ Notification process/procedures; roles/responsibilities, etc. • Dispatch Operations ○ General information ○ Dispatcher roles and responsibilities ○ Procedures for each functional area (Coordinator on Duty (COD), Overhead, Crews, Equipment, Aircraft, Predictive Services, etc.) ○ Dispatcher training and qualification requirements ○ Dispatch Center Staffing Plan  Call-out procedures for additional personnel in emergency situations  Designation of duty officer for dispatch center  Shift limitations and day off/EFF hiring ○ Procedures for dispatch of resources off unit • Daily Duties ○ Check-in/outof administrative/fire personnel ○ Procedures for gathering and disseminating intelligence and weather/briefings ○ Verification of initial attack response levels ○ Verification of status of suppression resources ○ Preparedness level establishment and verification ○ Procedures for providing information tothe field about suppression/support resource availability, radio frequencies tobe used, burning conditions/fuel types, weather forecast updates, local fire activity, agency policies, fire activity, incident updates, weather updates, resource status ○ Procedures for recording radio traffic, key events, and other information ina format accessible toall personnel (e.g., COD notes, shift briefs) • Initial Attack/Response Plan Elements ○ Preplanned dispatch plans, run-cards, and dispatch procedures ○ Management notification ofa reported fire ○ Procedures for identifying preparedness levels ○ Process for assessing the appropriate response ○ Identification and notification of resources to respond ○ Cooperator support and planned response ○ Communications procedures ○ Procedures to follow when activity exceeds the initial attack/response plan ○ Aviation procedures ○ Incident name protocols • Emergency Operations (Fire/Non-fire) ○ Notification ofa reported incident ○ Jurisdiction verification ○ Response plan activation ○ Agency and area notification ○ Move-upand cover procedures ○ Call-back procedures ○ Evacuation of incident area ○ Closing public/private roads ○ Ordering additional personnel, equipment, and aircraft ○ Fire Weather Watch and Red Flag Warning notification ○ Temporary Flight Restrictions (TFRs) ○ Agency duty officers (roles and responsibilities)
L-2 ○ NWCG Aviation Mishap Response Guide and Checklist, PMS 503 ○ Utility company notification (power and gas) ○ Law enforcement dispatching procedures/requirements ○ HazMat/spill response notification procedures ○ Local government requesting all-risk assistance ○ Search and Rescue • Local Agreements ○ Copies ofall interagency or inter-unit agreements and associated annual operating plans that govern the use of fire management resources ○ Maps delineating areas of responsibility for fire suppression coverage • Communications ○ Procedures for assigning/managing local radio frequencies ○ Procedures for obtaining additional frequencies ○ Maps of repeater sites ○ Instructions for using local dispatch radio consoles, phones, computers, fax machines, paging systems, etc.  BLM – The BLM National Radio Operations Section internal website (https://doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/blm-fa- nros/SitePages/Home.aspx?CT=1701969259764&OR=OWA-NT&CID=0ba9ddaf-f0a2-0583- a369-4791a670be1c) hosts radio and frequency policy documents and related information. The website is only accessible to Department ofthe Interior employees. • Weather ○ Procedures for processing of weather observations via Weather Information Management System (WIMS) ○ Daily posting and briefing procedures ○ Protocols in place for monitoring, requesting, and disseminating fire weather forecasts, fire weather watches, red flag warnings and other severe weather events (e.g., severe storm warnings, flash flood warnings, tornado warnings) to firefighters, incident commanders, and field-going personnel ○ Procedures for processing spot weather forecast requests and disseminating spot forecasts tothe field ○ Procedures for immediate notification to fire suppression personnel of Fire Weather Watches and Red Flag Warnings • Fire Danger ○ Locally significant fire danger indices and recording of those values daily • Briefings o Time frames and frequencies/locations for daily briefings o Method for documenting briefings (time given, content of briefing, and person(s) conducting and receiving briefing) • Preparedness Levels ○ General information relating tothe local preparedness plan:  Procedures for identifying preparedness level  Notification to management  Dispatching roles and responsibilities at each preparedness level ○ Trigger Points  Specific triggers that cause the preparedness level to move upor down, such as number/size of fires, amount and type of resources available/committed, regional/national fire situation, condition of local fuels, observed fire behavior, human-caused risk or predicted lightning activity level, etc.  Specific actions tied to each preparedness level, such as extended staffing, prepositioning of suppression resources (crews, engines, airtankers, smokejumpers, etc.), the activation of local Multi- Agency Coordination (MAC) groups, making contact with other agencies, and hiring of call when needed (CWN) aircraft, emergency equipment rental agreements (EERA), or administratively determined (AD) pay plan crews. • Aviation ○ Ordering/scheduling requirements and procedures ○ Special Use Airspace ○ Special use mission requirements
L-3 ○ Incident/accident reporting and documentation procedures ○ Flight management/tracking procedures ○ Access to FLIP/AP1B and aviation sectional charts • Expanded Dispatch Plan ○ Indicators for considering establishment of expanded dispatch ○ Recommended organization and points of contact ○ Overhead positions to order ○ Location/facilities, equipment/supplies, support needs ○ Procurement or buying unit team considerations • Service and Supply Plan ○ Current copies of competitive Incident Blanket Purchase Agreements (I-BPAs) ○ Source lists for incident-only sign-ups ○ Protocols for the useof dispatch priority lists (DPLs) ○ Protocols for incident business coordination with agency administrative personnel ○ Contact lists and hiring procedures forAD ornon-fire personnel, ground, and logistics support ○ A list of locations for use as staging areas, mobilization centers, and incident command posts (where applicable) ○ Procedures for local and geographic area cache ordering ○ Commercial travel procedures (including instructions onthe useof the agency corporate travel cards) ○ Incident management team and buying team mobilization Administrative Items • Funding, travel, time sheets, fire reports, etc. • Procedures for completing and archiving fire records • Procedures for mobilization of critical incident stress debriefing teams Medical Plan • Criteria/definitions; agency notification and documentation requirements • Procedures for Emergency Medical Response and notification • Activation/evacuation information • Medical facility locations and phone numbers • Air and ground transport (Medevac) capability • Burn center information Media Plan • General procedures • Notification requirements to agency external affairs personnel • Routing for media calls Required Reference Materials All coordination/dispatch centers will have the following reference materials available: • National Interagency Standards for Resource Mobilization • Geographic area mobilization guide • Interagency Resource Ordering Capability (IROC) • Interagency Standards for Fire and Fire Aviation Operations • WIMS User Guide • Interagency Situation Report User’s Guide • ICS – 209 Program (NIMS) User’s Guide • Emergency Response Guidebook (DOT) • NWCG Standards for Helicopter Operations • Aircraft identification/recognition/capability guide • NWCG Airtanker Base Directory • NWCG Standards for Aerial Supervision • Standards for Smokejumper Operations • Call-When-Needed Helicopter Contracts*
L-4 • NWCG Standards for Airspace Coordination • NWCG Standards for Airtanker Base Operations • Military/National Guard Operating Plan (if applicable) • Aviation safety plans • AP1B/FLIP access • Frequency guides • National/regional/state/local aviation plans • Local airport, SEAT base, airtanker base, helibase and smokejumper base locations • Current and complete NWCG Aviation Mishap Response Guide and Checklist • National Mobile Food Services Contract • National Mobile Shower Facilities Contract • National Interagency Incident Communications Division (NIICD) User’s Guide • NWCG Standards for Interagency Incident Business Management including geographic area supplements • NWCG National Fire Equipment Systems Catalog: PMS 449-1/PMS 449-2 • DPL contracts for vendors located inthe local area • A Continuity of Operations Plan (COOP) • Fire Danger Operating Plan or other preparedness operating plan as required by agency** • Current Fire Danger PocketCards or Seasonal Trend Analysis as required by agency** • Fire Management Plan** • Mutual aid/initial attack agreements** *Pre-season contact must be made to obtain this contract since itis no longer accessible onthe USFS website. For copies of contracts, contact: U.S. Forest Service Contracting National Interagency Fire Center 3833 S. Development Avenue, MS 1100 Boise, ID 83705-5354 Phone: 208-387-5670 Fax: 208-387-5384 ** Local dispatch centers only
Executive Summary of Changes Global Changes • Corrected BLM terminology regarding Fire and Aviation Directorate (FA). • Corrected terminology from Department of Interior to Department ofthe Interior. • Clarified type 1 through type 5 incident complexity levels. • Removed reference tothe NWCG Wildland Fire Risk and Complexity Assessment (RCA) in appendix Eand F. The hyperlink tothe RCAis provided inthe chapters. • Removed text regarding safety officer, line (SOFR) and inserted safety officer type 3 (SOF3). • Removed text referencing the National Incident Radio Support Cache (NIRSC) and inserted National Interagency Incident Communication Division (NIICD). • Corrected spelling errors. • Corrected broken hyperlinks. Chapter 1 – Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy and Doctrine Overview • No changes. Chapter 2 – BLM Program Organization and Responsibilities • Clarified text under heading “Harassment and Discrimination” regarding, “All fire personnel will be provided with a workplace free of harassment and unlawful discrimination. The Department is committed to providing a work environment free of discrimination and harassment based on race, color, religion, sex (including pregnancy), sexual orientation, national origin, age, disability, genetic information (including family medical history), status asa parent, marital status, or political affiliation, and free from illegal retaliation.” • Under heading “Program Manager Responsibilities,” subheading “Fire Planning and Fuels Management Division Chief (FA-600)” inserted Fire Ecology/Monitoring responsibility and associated text. • Inserted “Zone/ZFMO/ZAFMO” text throughout chapter for units that are zoned. • Under heading “Management Performance Requirements for Fire Operations”: o Clarified text in table H-1203-1 Appendix, Authority 12, for state director/district manager regarding, “IfSD orDM are not AADM qualified, they may not exercise this authority but may redelegate it. May only bere-delegated toa qualified BLM Agency Administrator (AADM) orthe Alaska State SFMO.” o Item D – Clarified, “The Alaska SFMO is delegated these authorities dueto the unique responsibilities and organizational structure ofBLM Alaska. . . .” o Under “Assigned Program Responsibility” table:  Block 22 – For District Manager and BLM Agency Administrator, removed existing text and inserted, “Ensure monitoring of smoke and communication of potential impacts from smoke is considered for all wildfires (Wildland Fire and Air Quality Coordination Secretarial MOU between USDA, DOI, EPA and CDC (https://www.usda.gov/sites/default/files/documents/usda-epa-doi-cdc-mou.pdf). Agency Administrators should consider ordering anAir Resource Advisor to work as part of IMTs when concerns regarding public health, transportation safety, or personnel safety issues from smoke are elevated asper Public Law 116-9, the Dingell Act, 2019, when appropriate to address smoke impacts" https://www.congress.gov/116/plaws/publ9/PLAW-116publ9.pdf.”  Clarified footnote that, “In Alaska, notifications will be made bythe State FMO/Alaska Fire Service Manager and will include the District Manager ifBLM lands were burned.” • Under heading “Fire Staff Performance Requirements for Fire Operations,” table “Assigned Program Responsibility”: o Changed column heading from “District FMO” to “District/Zone FMO.” o Block 3 – For district/zone FMO, clarified text regarding, “Ensure individual fire reports are accurate and are certified/approved inthe Interagency Fire Occurrence Reporting Modules (InFORM).” • Clarified text under heading “State and National Duty Officers” regarding, “The National Duty Officer number is208-387-5876.” • Changed column heading in “Safety and Health Responsibilities for the Fire Program” table from “Unit FMO” to “District/Zone FMO.” • Under subheading “BLM WCF 600-Class Command Vehicle Procurement Standards”: o Hotshot crew – Clarified approved asset types are: 652 superintendent or658 utility truck (2 total), 644 crew carrier (2 each), and (optional) utility task vehicle and trailer (1 each). o Hand crew – Clarified approved asset types are: 644 crew carrier, 651/653/654/657/658 command truck, 652 superintendent truck.
o Helitack crew – Clarified approved asset types are: 651/653/654/657/658 command truck, 652 superintendent truck, 661 helitack support. o Removed language regarding, “Standard vehicle configuration for wildland fire modules: 651/653/657/658 command truck, 652 superintendent truck.” o Inserted approved asset types for Wildland Fire Module are: 651/653/654/657/658 command truck, 652 superintendent truck, 661 helitack support. • Under subheading “Fire Equipment Standardization,” Table 1: o Line 5 – Changed Equipment Type Description from “Support/Utility/Chase/Prevention” to “Utility/Chase/Fuels/Prevention.” o Line 5 – Changed Alphabetical Designator from “UT/PT” to “UTL/FT/PT.” o Line 5 – Changed Equipment Identifier from “UT- X5XX” to “UTL- X5XX, PT-X5XX, andFT-X5XX.” oFor Hotshot Crew/Veteran Crew/Wildland Fire Module, Equipment Type Description – Crew Utility Truck:  Changed LBS Identifier from “CREW NAME + UT” to “CREW NAME + UTL.”  Changed Alphabetical Designator from “UT” to “UTL.”  Changed Equipment Identifier from “UT” to “UTL.” • Inserted text under subheading “Rural Fire Readiness Program” regarding, “The FAD will work with the NOC to ensure fire equipment is correctly transferred. This process includes ensuring the estimated salvage value and title transfer fees are paid tothe BLM WCF prior to transferring equipment to cooperators. The BLM is authorized to undertake the following actions: o Transfer the title ofBLM firefighting equipment which isno longer needed to carry out the functions ofthe wildland fire management program toone ofthe following organizations:  Rangeland Fire Protection Associations (RFPA).  Local volunteer fire departments.  Cooperators protecting remote communities under cooperative response agreements and who play a substantial role inthe suppression of wildland fires on Department ofthe Interior (DOI) and other federal lands. o Bypass the GSAXcess process for firefighting equipment and perform direct transfers to RFPAs and similarly eligible local firefighting cooperators as specified inthe RFR Equipment Transfer Program Guidelines. Please note the following exception: Working Capital Fund (WCF) equipment must be processed asa negotiated sale coordinated bythe controlling WCF office. o Policy, information, and instructions about RFR can be found at: https://doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/blm- fa/fire-operations/SitePages/BLM-Rural-Fire-Readiness-(RFR).aspx.” • Inserted text under subheading “National Preposition Funding” regarding, “National preposition cost codes will be provided upon authorization from FA.” • Under heading “BLM Firefighters General Non-Fire Training Requirements,” table “Agency Permanent, Career Seasonal, and Temporary Firefighters,” inserted Hearing Conservation as required training, with frequency upon initial employment and annually, and delivered bythe unit safety manager orin DOI Talent (https://doitalent.ibc.doi.gov/enrol/index.php?id=20192). • Under subheading “BLM Veteran Crews,” “BLM Veteran Crew Types and Locations” table, removed footnote regarding the Medford Crew isnot funded with preparedness funding. • Under heading “BLM Wildland Fire Modules,” inserted new subheading “BLM Wildland Fire Module Position Descriptions and Selective Placement Factors” and associated text. • Under heading “BLM Exclusive Use Helitack Crews”: o Removed text regarding the “BLM type 1 helicopter’s primary mission is initial attack.” o Clarified, “The primary mission for lower 48 exclusive-use helicopter programs are initial attack. While most effective at providing rapid initial attack response, crews are well equipped to respond to extended- attack incidents and critical need missions on large fires.” o Removed text regarding, “Extended attack incidents that utilize the crew to fill critical positions should immediately order replacement personnel for those positions in case the aircraft and crew are reassigned. BLM states may request to preposition the helicopter and crew, either directly tothe BLM state DO hosting the crew, or through the national duty officer (208-387-5876) followed bya resource order placed through the established dispatch channels.” oIn the “BLM Exclusive-Use Helicopter Locations” table:  Removed the California Ravendale Type 3 helicopter.  Removed the Montana Lewistown Type 3 helicopter.  Removed Miles City and inserted Billings.  Removed the Nevada Ely Type 3 helicopter.  Increased number of Type 3 helicopters in Elko, Nevada from oneto two.
• Inserted new subheading “BLM Use of Formalized Strategic Planning on Wildland Fires” and associated text. Chapter 3 – NPS Program Organization and Responsibilities • Under heading “NPS Firefighter Target Physical Fitness Standards” table, for adjustments to compensate for altitude differences, removed “deduct” time and inserted “add” time for altitudes 5000’ and above. Chapter 4 – FWS Program Organization and Responsibilities • Change subheading and references throughout the chapter from “Project Leader/Refuge Manager” to “Line Officer.” • Under heading “Agency Administrator Roles”: o Subheading “Line Officer”:  Removed text in bullet regarding, “Ifan AADM is absent during an incident, the refuge supervisor and RFMC will assess ofthe acting AADM’s capabilities and provide appropriate additional support.” Inserted, “The line officer will ensure a qualified AADM is assigned.”  Inserted bullet regarding, “Hatchery programs with wildfire or prescribed fire potential will maintain AADM capability or ensure a delegation of authority toa neighboring AADM within their fire zone isin place.”  Inserted bullet regarding, “Coastal and Partners for Fish and Wildlife programs follow 645 FW1 policy when FWS Fire Management supports cooperative agreements for prescribed fire implementation.” o Subheading “Management Performance Requirements for Fire Operations” table:  Changed column name from “Project Leader/Refuge Manager” to “Line Officer.”  Block 3 – For Regional Chief/Refuge Supervisor and Line Officer, clarified text regarding, “Attends theM-581, Fire Program Management, an Overview course (offered atthe geographic level) orthe Agency Administrator Training Workshop hosted bythe National Interagency Prescribed Fire Training Center (NIPFTC) within two years of appointment. . . .”  Block 17 – Clarified text for the Line Officer regarding “Personally visit at least one wildfire or prescribed fire each year.” • Inserted new heading “Preparedness Reviews” and associated text. o Inserted new subheading “USFWS Preparedness Review Schedules” and associated text. • Under heading “Mobile Fire Equipment Policy”: o Inserted “All wildland fire management vehicles will:  Be uniquely identified inthe Financial and Business Management System (FBMS).  Fire Equipment Maintenance Procedure and Record (FEMPR) will be maintained for all wildland fire vehicles and will be used to document routine and annual inspections and maintenance.  Routine inspections will be performed and documented daily or prior to vehicle use.  Annual inspections should be performed and logged at regularly scheduled intervals, butno less than onan annual basis, oras required by manufacturers’ schedules. Annual inspections will be performed bya qualified mechanic.  The FEMPR shall record the historic maintenance throughout the service life to help determine trends, repair frequency, and repair costs.  FEMPR review for all fire vehicles will be completed during local and regional reviews to ensure compliance with inspection requirements.” • Under heading “Training”: o Inserted bullet under subheading “Agency Administrator Training” regarding, “Agency Administrators who have the authority and responsibility to oversee prescribed fire implementation are required to attend RT-300on a biennial basis. The class must bea minimum of4 hours. Refer to memo FWS/ANRS/NRCP- FM/079978.” o Clarified text under subheading “Zone Fire Management Officer Training” regarding, “All ZFMOs are required to attend theM-581, Fire Program Management, an Overview course within one year of entry on duty.” Chapter 5 – USFS Program Organization and Responsibilities • Under heading “Specific Line Officer Responsibilities for Fire and Aviation atthe Field Level”: o Subheading “Preparedness”:  Clarified bullet regarding, “Ensure fire and aviation preparedness reviews are conducted each year and include the key components ofthe Nationwide Aerial Application of Fire Retardant on National Forest System Lands Record of Decision.”  Removed bullet text regarding, “Meet annually with local U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) fisheries specialists to ensure the
avoidance maps reflect changes during the year on additional species or changes made for designated critical habitat, and reporting and monitoring guidelines are still valid and being applied.” Inserted, “Coordinate annually with the Fish and Wildlife Service (at both the Field Office and Headquarters staff levels) to ensure that retardant avoidance areas on National Forest System Lands are mapped using the most up-to-date species information, such asany new detections and any other relevant data.” o Subheading “Wildfire Response”:  Clarified text regarding, “Personally attend reviews on type 1and type 2 complexity fires. Ensure agency representatives are assigned and delegated authority when appropriate.”  Clarified text regarding, “Ensure briefings include information regarding aerial application of fire retardant and avoidance areas as described inthe current Implementation Guide. Include the reporting requirements inthe briefing ifan intrusion of fire chemical occurs. . . .”  Clarified text regarding, “Ensure smoke impacts tothe public and fire personnel are addressed by ensuring that Air Resource Advisors (ARA, technical specialist) are ordered to work as part of IMTs tothe maximum extent practicable for wildfires classified as having type 1 complexity inthe Organizational Assessment in WFDSS. Ensure assignment of ARAs as part of IMTs for type 2 complexity fires (asper Public Law 116-9, the Dingell Act, 2019, when appropriate to address smoke impacts (https://www.congress.gov/116/plaws/publ9/PLAW-116publ9.pdf).” oIn table under subheading “Wildfire Response Responsibilities and Oversight,” changed column heading from “Incident Type” to “Incident Complexity.” • Under heading “Agency Administrator Training and Qualifications for Wildland Fire Management”: o Subheading “Definitions”:  Changed table heading from “Incident or Project Type” to “Incident or Project Complexity.”  Removed “Coach/shadow team” and definition.  Removed “Shadow” and definition. o Subheading “Agency Administrator Wildfire Qualification Program”:  Clarified text regarding, “When the complexity level ofa wildfire exceeds anAA’s qualification, a qualified coach will be assigned.”  Clarified text regarding, “. . . The coaching/training functions, tobe administered by each region, isan integral part of this qualification program.”  Under “Guidelines,” clarified bullet text regarding, “For individuals that donot meet at least the working level, a coach will be assigned to support that agency administrator in managing type 3or higher complexity wildfire incidents.” o Removed text for Prescribed Fire Agency Administrator Type 1 (RXA1) Evaluation Process regarding, “Individuals involved ina shadow assignment should receive creditable experience through documentation.” • Under heading “Specific Fire Management Staff Responsibilities for Fire Operations atthe Field Level”: o Subheading “Wildfire Response”:  Clarified text regarding, “Ensure all intrusions of wildland fire chemicals are reported and appropriate consultation conducted as needed (see chapter 12).”  Removed text regarding, “Ensure 5% assessment of fires less than 300 acres that had aerial fire retardant used and have avoidance areas asa result ofthe record of decision for the nationwide aerial application of fire retardant onNFS land is completed and documented for misapplication reporting.” Chapter 6 – BIA Program Organization and Responsibilities • Clarified text under heading “BIA Fire Operations Website” regarding, “BIA Division of Wildland Fire Management (DWFM) maintains a website that hosts operational, informational, and policy-related documents…The website also contains information about job recruitment, BIA training, Pathways Internship Program, fuels management, aviation, and wildland fire prevention.” • Under heading “Agency Administrator Responsibilities”: o Removed, “Chief, Division of Forestry and Wildland Fire Management” and inserted, “Directorate, Environmental and Natural Resources.” o Under subheading “National Fire Leadership Team”:  Inserted bullet regarding, “Make collaborative decisions that represent the BIA and Tribal programs for interagency wildland fire incident management standards, and incident position standards, which all NWCG agencies utilize.”  Removed bullet text for the NFLT consists of, “Fuels, Aviation, Operations, Budget, Administration, and Public Affairs Officer and other Central Office Managers,” and inserted, “DWFM Branch Chief’sand Central Office managers.”
o Inserted bullet under subheading “Inherently Federal Activities” regarding, “Approval from the BIA Aviation Branch Office is required to utilize Tribal employees and casual hires to staff air attack platforms.” • Under heading “Program Planning”: o Clarified text regarding, “Strategic planning for BIA field-level units relies primarily on FMPs (including spatial fire management plans) and fire danger rating trend analysis, per the interagency guidance in chapters 9and 10, respectively. Fire management plans are critical strategic documents that guide the full range of fire management activities. The BIA recommends units supplement agency fire management plans with NWCG-compliant PocketCards or equivalent fire danger assessment tools. The Fire Danger Pocket Card and equivalent tools provide a format for interpreting and communicating key index values provided bythe National Fire Danger Rating System (NFDRS) orthe Canadian Forest Fire Danger Rating System (CFFDRS). The objective isto lead to greater awareness of environmental and vegetation burning conditions, and subsequently increased firefighter safety, by providing a description of seasonal changes in fire danger ina local area. Itis useful to both local and out-of-area firefighters.” o Changed subheading from “Fire Weather/Remote Automatic Weather System (RAWS)” to “Fire Weather/Remote Automatic Weather Stations (RAWS).”  Under subheading “Fire Weather/Remote Automatic Weather Stations (RAWS)”: - Clarified text regarding, “The fire weather program is managed and coordinated bythe DWFM Operations Section, which has been delegated tothe BIA National RAWS Coordinator https://raws.nifc.gov/raws-interagency-contacts. This program provides funding and technical support for the maintenance and emergency repairs of station sensors to ensure the accuracy of station data for all BIA stations that area critical component ofthe RAWS Network (See chapter 10) for fire weather and fire danger rating purposes. All stations will adhere tothe NWCG Standards for Fire Weather Stations (PMS 426-3). Stations are serviced through an interagency agreement with the Remote Sensing/Fire Weather Support Unit (RSFWSU) aka RAWS Depot located at NIFC. All permanent stations areon a Modified Service (annual RAWS technician visit) and portable/quick deploy stations areon the Portable Return Service; descriptions canbe found onthe RSFWSU Services tabon NIFC RAWS Homepage.” - Inserted, “All technical questions about RAWS canbe directed tothe RAWS Help Desk: 208-387- 5475, rawshelp@blm.gov.” - Deleted, “All field-level units will identify at least one permanent, National Fire Danger Rating System (NFDRS) fire weather station for fire planning purposes. A listing of these designated weather stations is maintained bythe WFM Fuels Management staff andis updated annually.” - Deleted, “Each region must identify a regional point of contact (RPOC), and each agency/Tribe must identify a local point of contact (LPOC) for fire weather and weather stations. These contacts must be updated immediately upon reassignment toa new POC and provided tothe BIA National RAWS Coordinator.” o Changed subheading from “BIA and Tribal NFDRS Weather Stations” to “BIA and Tribal Portable Fire Weather Stations.”  Under subheading “BIA and Tribal Portable Fire Weather Stations”: - Deleted, “The BIA Central Office, Division of Wildland Fire Management (DWFM) maintains a national contract with Forest Technology Systems, Ltd., (FTS) to provide annual maintenance, factory exchange service, and emergency repair to81 permanent NFDRS weather stations. When noncompliant or malfunctioning RAWS are identified or suspected, fire managers should implement the following hazard mitigation actions to expedite RAWS repair andto reduce risk to fire personnel: Contact a technical support specialist atFTS and the BIA National RAWS Coordinator to resolve the noncompliance or emergency repair issue.” - Inserted, “All BIA and Tribal portable/quick deploy stations will meet the Fire RAWS Standards and Guidelines inthe NWCG Standards for Fire Weather Stations (PMS 426-3). To facilitate annual maintenance requirements, all stations have been puton a Portable Return Service with the RAWS Depot and must be sent there ona yearly basis inthe following manner:  Goto WXx-Weather (weather.nifc.gov), select Read Only (No Login Required), then select Shipping Label Request onthe left side panel to fill out the form and then select Create Label fora prepaid shipping label.  The entire portable RAWS must be shipped tothe RAWS Depot in order to provide adequate service, this includes: the cabinet, tripod, GOES and VHF antennas, all weather sensors with associated cables, radio (if equipped with anRVT) and vinyl cases with foam inserts. Ifthe original cardboard shipping boxes from the vendor or boxes from the Depot are available,
PLEASE SHIP VINYL CASES INSIDE THE CARDBOARD BOXES FOR ADDED PROTECTION.  Upon receipt, the RAWS Depot will refurbish and recalibrate to426-3 standards and return within 90 days or notify receiving unit if unable todo so.  Service exceptions - Units are responsible for components that are damaged beyond normal repair. Maintenance actions will be suspended until replacement components are received.” - Inserted, “Activation of portable fire weather stations is accomplished by contacting the RAWS Help Desk (208-387-5475, rawshelp@blm.gov) but will notbe processed ifthe station is noncompliant with annual maintenance. Portables are only intended for temporary use and should be deactivated when notin use. They will notbe setup permanently andif that need exists then contact the BIA National RAWS Coordinator (RAWS Contacts) to discuss a permanent solution.” o Removed subheading “Non-NFDRS Weather Stations” and associated text. o Removed subheading “Weather Station Naming Conventions” and associated text. o Removed subheading “Station Identifiers” and associated text. o Changed subheading from “Weather Module in Wildland Fire Management Information” to “RAWS Management inWXx Weather (WXx).”  Under subheading “RAWS Management inWXx Weather (WXx)”: - Inserted, “A station inventory, metadata and observations ofBIA RAWS for any Region or Unit canbe found by using the Station Search inWXx Weather (weather.nifc.gov), no login is required, select the icon under Details for any station to access the Observations button and other information.”  Inserted bullet regarding, “Each station must have aPOC listed inWXx that canbe responsive to emails/phone calls from the RAWS Depot about annual maintenance, an alternate POCis recommended.”  Inserted bullet regarding, “POCs canbe updated by contacting the RAWS Help Desk orthe BIA National RAWS Coordinator.”  Inserted bullet regarding, “Ifa POC needs to request Maintenance edit access, then the eRequest form canbe found onthe left side panel under Request Edit Access. This access is only necessary ifyou are responsible for ordering sensors for repair/troubleshooting purposes, viewing Station Event reports, or updating metadata within WXx.” - Removed “Weather Module Access” and associated bullets. o Inserted subheading “BIA and Tribal Smoke Management” and associated text. • Under heading “Vehicle Maintenance, Replacement, and Repairs,” removed subheading “Replacement Guidelines” and associated text. • Under heading “National Aviation Program”: o Removed, “The BIA Wildland Fire and Aviation Management Program staff recommends BIA policy, procedures, and standards; and maintains functional oversight and interagency coordination for all aviation activities. The DWFM established two interregional aviation management offices to provide technical aviation expertise support for regional, agency, and field offices. Each of these offices supports BIA regions across geographic boundaries. Each ofthe interregional offices is staffed byan IRAM andan AOS, both of which are available to provide support for any region.” o Inserted, “The DWFM, Aviation Branch Office recommends BIA policy, procedures, and standards, and maintains functional oversight and interagency coordination for all aviation activities. The Aviation Branch is staffed with aviation personnel who can provide technical aviation expertise and guidance within all BIA regions.” o Removed subheading “Aviation Program Goals” and associated text. o Inserted subheading “Program Requirements”:  Inserted bullet “Regional and Unit Office Supervision, Management, and Plans” and associated text.  Inserted bullet “Funding and Staffing” and associated text.  Inserted bullet “Safety Standards” and associated text.  Inserted bullet “Training, Qualifications, and Certifications” and associated text.  Inserted bullet “Facilities and Infrastructure” and associated text.  Inserted bullet “Vehicle Requirements” and associated text.  Inserted bullet “Annual Airbase Reviews” and associated text.  Inserted bullet “Final Reports for Annual Airbase Reviews” and associated text.  Inserted bullet “Readiness Evaluations” and associated text.  Inserted bullet “Site Visits” and associated text.  Inserted bullet “DOI5-Year Aviation Evaluations” and associated text.  Inserted bullet “Compliance and Accountability” and associated text.
o Under subheading “Aviation Program Goals”:  Removed text regarding, “The DWFM, Aviation Branch Office, recommends BIA policy, procedures, and standards; and maintains functional oversight and interagency coordination for all aviation activities. The Aviation Branch is staffed with aviation personnel who can provide technical aviation expertise and guidance within all BIA regions. The primary goals ofthe Aviation Branch Offices areto promote aviation safety, efficiency, cost effectiveness.”  Inserted text regarding, “The Aviation Branch supports all BIA aviation activities and missions with various assets through strategic program guidance, managing aviation programs of national scope, in coordination with the Office of Aviation Services (OAS) and interagency partners.”  Inserted text regarding, “The Aviation Branch Office has the responsibility and authority, after consultation with regional FMOs, for funding and acquisition ofall fire aircraft, prioritizing the allocation ofBIA aircraft ona bureau wide basis, and approving regional office requests to acquire supplemental aircraft resources.” o Under subheading “Regional Office Level”:  Removed existing text and inserted: - “Regional aviation managers or official delegate are responsible for providing oversight for aircraft hosted in their region and have the authority and responsibility to approve, with the Aviation Branch Office concurrence, acquisition of supplemental aircraft resources within their region. - Regional aviation managers or official delegate have the authority to prioritize the allocation, prepositioning, and movement ofall aircraft assigned tothe BIA within their region. - Regional aviation managers must have a signed delegation letter providing authority to make aviation related decision within their regional jurisdiction. To include authority to implement aviation program objectives and directives to support the BIA mission and each region’s goals. Some regions may have additional support staff assigned to support aircraft operations andto provide technical expertise. A regional aviation management plan is required to outline goals ofthe region’s aviation program andto identify policy and procedures specific to that region. - Important Note: A region isnot generally authorized to supplement this policy with more restrictive policy or procedures than the national policy, unless the policy or procedure is approved bythe Aviation Branch Office. - The aviation branch meets Department ofthe Interior and interagency standards when hosting exclusive-use aviation programs in support of wildland fire operations and other non-fire mission activities. The standards align with the DOI Departmental Manual, Parts 112, 350, 351, 352, and 353, Indian Affairs Manual, Part 57, and aviation policies. These policies apply toall BIA Aviation programs including the personnel, equipment, and facilities necessary to support wildland fire and other bureau missions.” o Removed existing text under subheading “Agency/Field Office Level” and inserted, “Agency, field managers, and staff manage their programs as necessary to conduct their aviation operations safely. Agency aviation managers (AAMs) serve asthe focal point for the agency aviation program by providing technical expertise and management of aviation resources to support agency programs. Many agencies have aviation management asa collateral duty; therefore, during periods of intense aviation activity (e.g., wildland fire support), ensure aviation oversight is maintained. When other duties interfere or compete with effective aviation management, request assistance from the regional office. Agencies are responsible for hosting, supporting, providing daily management, and dispatching all aircraft assigned to their unit. Agencies have the authority to request additional resources, establish priorities, and make assignments for all aircraft assigned tothe BIA within their agency. AAMs have the responsibility for aviation activities atthe local level, including aviation mission planning, risk management and safety, supervision, and evaluation. AAMs assist line officers with risk assessment/management and cost analysis. All Tribal and agency offices utilizing aircraft should have a current and approved aviation management plan on file.” o Removed text under subheading “Aviation Safety” and inserted, “The BIA and the interagency partners adhere tothe standard Safety Management Systems (SMS) asthe foundation toour aviation safety program. For further information, reference chapter 16. All safety-related issues to include SAFECOMs will be communicated tothe Aviation Branch Office and routed tothe appropriate aviation safety certified individual. All senior executives and federally appointed executive flights must be coordinated with the Aviation Branch Office atthe beginning ofthe request to ensure proper and timely planning. Refer toOPM-7, OMB Circular A-126, and BIA National Aviation Plan.” • Under heading “Safety and Risk Management”: o Inserted subheading “Critical Incident Stress Management (CISM) Program,“ which includes Standard of Care and Certification, CISM Qualifications, and CISM Request Processes for fire and non-fire requests.
o Inserted text under subheading “Motor Vehicle Operation Policy” regarding, “Fire Vehicle Driver Orientation course, BL-300, and the Wildland Fire Safety Training Annual Refresher, RT-301, are mandatory for all BIA wildland fire management and support personnel who operate vehicles. This includes all general schedule (GS), administratively determined (AD), and Tribal personnel performing wildland fire and prescribed fire operations. Training instruction forBL-300 and RT-301 can be found atBIA Fire Vehicle Driving Training.” • Under heading “Fire Communications and Education,” inthe table column, “Wildland Fire Prevention,” changed bullet from “Juvenile fire setter prevention” to “Youth Fire Setter Intervention Program.” Chapter 7 – Safety and Risk Management • No significant changes. Chapter 8 – Interagency Coordination and Cooperation • No changes. Chapter 9 – Fire Management Planning • No significant changes. Chapter 10 – Preparedness • No significant changes. Chapter 11 – Incident Management and Response • Changed heading from “Wildfire Complexity” to “Wildfire Complexity Level.” o Under heading “Wildfire Complexity Level”:  Clarified, “Complexity Level is determined by completing Part Eof the NWCG Wildland Fire Risk and Complexity Assessment (RCA), PMS 236.”  Removed, “Incidents not meeting the recommended incident typing characteristics in this chapter should have a documented RCA (appendix E) verifying the command organization is appropriate.” o Under heading “Wildfire Risk and Complexity Assessment”:  Clarified, “The RCA assists personnel with evaluating the situation, objectives, risks, and management considerations ofan incident and recommends the appropriate organization necessary to manage the incident, which is documented in Part C.”  Clarified, “The RCA also includes common indicators of incident complexity to assist firefighters and managers with determining incident management organizational needs. These common indicators are found in Part Eof the RCA.”  Clarified, “The RCA Part Bcan be used to populate the “Relative Risk Assessment” and Part C “Organization Assessment” portions ofthe Wildland Fire Decision Support System (WFDSS).” • Under heading “Command Organizations”: o Subheading, “Incident Command”:  Clarified that, “All wildfires, regardless of complexity level, will have an incident commander (IC).”  Clarified that, “For type 3, 4, or5 incident complexity levels, delegations/expectations maybe written or oral.” • Under heading “Incident Characteristics,” subheading “Type 1and Type 2 Incident Complexity Indicators,” clarified text regarding, “Refer to Part Eof the NWCG Wildland Fire Risk and Complexity Assessment (RCA).” • Under heading “Incident Management Teams,“ subheading “Area Command,” clarified text regarding, “See appendix Jfor the Area Command (AC) Complexity Assessment template.” • Under heading “Wildland Fire Decision Support System”: o Clarified text regarding, “For detailed information onthe tools and capabilities in WFDSS, how managers may use the tools, and suggested WFDSS refresher training items, refer to appendix Kand https://wfdss.usgs.gov/wfdss/WFDSS_Home.shtml.” o Clarified text under a published decision documents regarding, “The framework for the actions tobe performed under the delegation of authority which authorizes anIC to operate ona specific unit(s). See “Agency Administrator Responsibilities” under “Managing the Incident” heading and appendix Efor delegation of authority specifics.” • Under heading “New Decision” for WFDSS: o Clarified that, “Additional information about WFDSS canbe found in appendix K.” o Removed BLM-specific text in footnote 3 under table “DOI WFDSS Approval Authorities” regarding, “Approvals may only bere-delegated toa qualified BLM Agency Administrator per agency policy. See chapter 2for fire cost notification requirements.” Inserted, “Ifthe District Manager isnot a qualified
Agency Administrator (AADM), they may not exercise this authority but may re-delegate it. Itmay only bere-delegated toa qualified BLM AADM. See chapter 2for fire cost notification requirements.” o Changed FS-specific table column heading from “Incident Type” to “Incident Complexity.” • Under heading “Managing the Incident”: o Subheading “Agency Administrator Definition”:  Clarified FS-specific bullet regarding, “Complete anRCA for type 1, 2, and3 complexity incidents within WFDSS.”  Clarified bullet text regarding, “Issue a written delegation of authority tothe IC (appendix E) andto other appropriate officials, agency administrator representative, resource advisor, and incident business advisor.”  Removed text regarding the delegation of authority tothe ICand other appropriate officials. . .should, ” Assign a READ(s) tothe IMT.” o Subheading “Resource Advisor Responsibilities”:  Removed text regarding, “The READ is responsible for anticipating the impacts of fire operations on natural and cultural resources and for communicating protection requirements for those resources tothe IC. The READ should ensure IMT compliance with theL/RMP and FMP. The READ should provide theIC with information, analysis, and advice on these areas. . . .”  Inserted, “Members ofthe resource advising group (Archaeologist (ARCH), Resource Advisor, Coordinator (REAC), Resource Advisor (READ), and Resource Advisor, Fireline (REAF)) are responsible for anticipating the impacts of fire operations on natural and cultural resources and for communicating protection requirements to those managing the incident. They should ensure IMT compliance with the law, regulation, and policy for the protection of these resources. The resource advising group should provide information, analysis, and advice on these areas:” - Removed bullet “Land Ownership.” - Removed bullet “Fuel breaks (locations and specifications).” - Removed text in bullet regarding, “Critical wildlife habitat,” and inserted, “Protected and sensitive wildlife areas.” - Inserted bullet regarding, “Potential impacts to local wildlife species.” - Clarified bullet regarding, “Poisonous plants, insects, and venomous snakes.” - Removed text in bullet regarding, “Archeological site, historic trails, paleontological sites.” Inserted, “Archaeological sites, historic trails, paleontological sites, and traditional cultural properties.” - Clarified bullet regarding, “Riparian areas including retardant buffers.” - Clarified bullet regarding, “Special management areas (wilderness areas, wilderness study areas, recommended wilderness, inventoried roadless areas, national monuments, national conservation areas, national historic landmarks and structures, areas of critical environmental concern, research natural areas, wild and scenic rivers, trails).” - Removed text regarding, “The READ and agency administrator representative positions are generally filled by local unit personnel. These positions maybe combined and performed byone individual.” Inserted, “Depending onthe complexity and duration ofthe incident, members ofthe resource advising group maybe amix of local and out of area personnel. Although present onthe fireline, the members ofthe resource advising group report tothe agency administrator. Duties are stated inthe Resource Advisor’s Guide for Wildland Fire, PMS 313.” o Under subheading, “Team Evaluation,” removed, “See appendix Ifor the IMT evaluation form.” Inserted, “ See https://www.nifc.gov/nicc/logistics/reference-documents for the Interagency Incident Management Team (IMT) Incident Evaluation form.” • Under heading “Fire Management in Wilderness”: o Clarified, “Any delegation of authority to IMTs will convey appropriate emphasis onthe preservation of wilderness character and resources and will ensure interaction with resource advisor(s) with expertise in wilderness stewardship.” o Clarified text inBLM-specific bullet regarding, “BLM Manual 6340—Management ofBLM Wilderness (2012), Section 1.6.C.7 states that tothe greatest extent possible, the Bureau will manage all wildfires in wilderness: 1) using Minimum Impact Strategies Tactics (MIST) wherever possible; 2) if feasible, without equipment that would ordinarily be prohibited under Section 4(c) ofthe Wilderness Act; and3) by assigning a resource advisor with expertise in wilderness stewardship. . . .” • Under heading “Operational Guidelines for Aquatic Invasive Species”: o Clarified text regarding, “Local area or agency guidelines may also be available and useful and local biologists, resource advisors, and fire personnel should consult with each other during the preseason regarding known aquatic invasive species locations to facilitate incident avoidance when possible.”
o Clarified bullet text regarding, “Consult with local biologists, resource advisors, and fire personnel for known aquatic invasive species locations inthe area and avoid them when possible.” • Clarified text under heading “Operational Guidelines for Invasive Species” regarding, “Firefighter personnel should clean items such as personal equipment, boots, clothing of weed or other invasive species materials, including visible plant parts, soil, and other materials as identified bythe resource advisor(s).” • Under heading “Post-Wildfire Activities”: o Removed text regarding post-wildfire activities references canbe found in, “Interagency Burned Area Emergency Response Guidebook – Interpretation of Department ofthe Interior 620DM 7and USDA Forest Service Manual 2523, For the Emergency Stabilization of Federal and Tribal Trust Lands (version 4.0, February 2006) and Interagency Burned Area Rehabilitation Guidebook – Interpretation of Department ofthe Interior 620DM 7, For the Burned Area Rehabilitation of Federal and Tribal Trust Lands (version 1.3, October 2006).” o Inserted DOI-specific bullet regarding:  Interagency Burned Area Emergency Response Guidebook – Interpretation of Department ofthe Interior 620DM 7  Interagency Burned Area Rehabilitation Guidebook – Interpretation of Department ofthe Interior 620DM 7o Inserted FS-specific bullet regarding, “USDA Forest Service Manual 2523, Burned Area Emergency Response (BAER).” o Clarified text under subheading “Suppression Repair” regarding, “Planned actions taken to repair the damages to resources, lands, and facilities resulting from wildfire suppression actions and documented inthe Suppression Repair Plan. . . .” o Inserted FS-specific text under subheading “Emergency Stabilization” regarding, “No later than 1 year after the containment ofthe fire as documented inthe Burned Area Response Funding Request and Authorization.” o Under subheading “Rehabilitation”:  Clarified text regarding, “Efforts taken to repair or improve wildfire-damaged lands unlikely to recover naturally to management-approved conditions orto repair/replace minor assets damaged by wildfire. Rehabilitation actions must be taken per agency policy.”  Inserted DOI-specific text regarding, “Within 5 years following 21 days after the ignition date ofa wildfire as documented ina separate Burned Area Rehabilitation Plan (BAR) orin combination with Burned Area Emergency Response Plan (BAER).“  Deleted FS-specific text regarding, “A Burned Area Emergency Response Plan (BAER).” Inserted, “No later than 3 years after the containment ofthe fire as documented inthe Burned Area Rehabilitation Funding Request and Authorization.” o Under subheading “Restoration”:  Clarified that, “Continuing the rehabilitation beyond agency rehabilitation timeframes orthe repair or replacement of major assets damaged bythe wildfire.”  Inthe “Post-Wildfire Activities” table: - Row “Urgency,” column “Rehabilitation” – Clarified 1-5 years DOI; 1-3 years FS. - Row “Urgency,” column “Restoration” – Clarified 5+ years DOI; 3+ years FS. - Row “Responsibility,” column “Emergency Stabilization” – Removed agency administrator and inserted local unit line officer. - Row “Responsibility,” column “Rehabilitation” - Removed agency administrator and inserted local unit line officer. - Row “Responsibility,” column “Restoration” - Removed agency administrator and inserted local unit line officer.  Inthe “Emergency Stabilization Approval Authorities” table: - Row “Regional/ State Approval Level,” column “FWS” – Clarified text regarding, “<$500,000 - Assistant Regional Director, Refuges with regional fire management coordinator concurrence.” - Row “Regional/ State Approval Level,” column “FS” – Clarified text regarding, “$100,000 Eastern and Alaska Regional Foresters.” - Row “National Approval Level,” column “FS” – Clarified text regarding, “>$100,000or $500,000 Director, Field Services and Innovation Center.” • Under heading “Burned Area Emergency Response Teams”: o Removed, “BAER teams area standing orad hoc group of technical specialists (e.g., hydrologists, biologists, soil scientists) that develop and may implement portions ofthe BAER plans.”
o Inserted, “Incident BAER teams area group of fireline-qualified technical specialists (e.g., hydrologists, biologists, soil scientists) that analyze post-fire conditions and develop the Emergency Stabilization and Rehabilitation (DOI) or Burned Area Emergency Response (FS) funding requests.” o Clarified text regarding, “The team’s size and skills should be commensurate with the size and complexity ofthe wildfire.” o Removed text regarding, “The agency administrator is responsible for designating an interdisciplinary BAER team. However, BAER teams must coordinate closely with ICand IMTto work safely and efficiently. The agency administrator is responsible for submitting the Emergency Stabilization BAER Plan tothe regional office for review and approval within the timeframes established by each agency. Coordination should occur with the regional BAER coordinator. If needed, extensions canbe negotiated with those having the appropriate level of approval authority.” o Inserted, “The local unit line officer is responsible for submitting the funding request tothe regional or state office for review and approval within the timeframes established by each agency. Coordination should occur with the regional BAER coordinator during the assessment process. If needed, extensions canbe negotiated with those having the appropriate level of approval authority.” o Removed DOI-specific text regarding, “The full national BAER team is dispatched to more difficult incidents involving extreme risks to human life and critical Federal assets. Potential floods, mud and debris flows, watershed/municipal water supplies, urban interface, and complex and multiple jurisdictions are the dispatch prioritization criteria issues factored into the mobilization decision. Less complex incidents will use local, regional, interagency, and contracted adhoc BAER teams that maybe supplemented with national BAER team personnel. Bureau coordinators maintain rosters of BAER personnel for less complex incidents.” o Removed FS-specific text regarding, “Each Forest Service unit identifies a core BAER team prior to fire season. Regional coordinators maintain rosters of experienced BAER personnel inthe region. When needed, specific BAER personnel representing needed specialties from other units can either be contacted directly or through dispatch. See FSM 2523 and FSH 2509.13for agency- specific policy and direction for BAER teams.” o Inserted FS-specific text regarding, “The local Forest or Grassland Supervisor designates a unit BAER Coordinator and qualified BAER personnel prior to fire season. National and regional BAER coordinators maintain a roster of experienced BAER personnel available for assignments. When needed, specific BAER personnel from other units canbe requested through the national and regional BAER Coordinators. Once team members have been assigned, they should be ordered tothe specific BAER incident by name request through dispatch. See FSM 2523 for agency-specific policy and direction for BAER teams.” o Clarified FWS-specific text under heading “Interagency Final Fire Reports and Datasets” regarding, “For wildfires that originate onFWS lands, or lands formally protected byFWS, final fire reports shall be submitted via InFORM, as noted in chapter 4.” • Changed subheading from “Fire Loss Tolerance Reporting for Type 1and 2 Incidents” to “Fire Loss Tolerance Reporting for Type 1and 2 Complexity Incidents.” Chapter 12 – Suppression Chemicals and Delivery Systems • Clarified text under heading “Types of Fire Chemicals,” subheading “Long-Term Retardant” regarding, “Retardants maybe applied aerially by very large, large, and single engine (SEAT) airtankers and helicopter bucket.” • Under heading “Interagency Policy for Aerial and Ground Delivery of Wildland Fire Chemicals Near Waterways and Other Avoidance Areas”: o Clarified table footnote regarding, “Because there isthe potential for TEPCS, their designated critical habitats, or other resources such as cultural or heritage areas to occur in waterway buffers or additional mapped avoidance areas, consult the proper resource advisor(s) prior to application to determine best action orthe potential for environmental effects.” o Changed subheading from “Exceptions for Aerial Delivery of Long-Term Retardant on USDA Forest Service Lands (2011 Record of Decision)” to “Exceptions for Aerial Delivery of Long-Term Retardant on USDA Forest Service Lands (2024 Record of Decision).” o Clarified text under subheading “Exceptions for Aerial Delivery of Long-Term Retardant on USDA Forest Service Lands ( 2024 Record of Decision)” regarding, “Deviations from the policy are allowed in cases where human life or public safety is threatened and retardant use within avoidance areas could be reasonably expected to alleviate that threat.” • Under heading “Reporting Requirements of Aerially Delivered Wildland Fire Chemicals Into Waterways, Waterway Buffer Areas and Mapped Avoidance Areas”:
o Clarified bullet text regarding, “The information will be forwarded to incident management and the agency administrator, usually through the resource advising group.” o Clarified text regarding, “. . .This requirement resulted from the Forest Service’s acceptance of Biological Opinions received from the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS), and the 2024 Record of Decision (ROD) for Nationwide Aerial Application of Fire Retardant on National Forest System Lands. . . .” Chapter 13 – Firefighter Training and Qualifications • Under heading “Incident Qualifications and Certification System”: o Removed BLM-specific text regarding, “Transition of hard copy records to electronic records must be completed by December 31, 2024. During the transition, IQCS certifying officials have the option to keep employee training and qualification records asa hard-copy file oran electronic file. Additional information canbe found at https://www.nifc.gov/about-us/our-partners/blm/training.” Inserted, “Employee training and qualification records will only be stored electronically in IQCS.” o Removed BIA-specific text regarding, “Agency superintendents and line officers of Tribal fire programs who choose delegation of authority ofthe certifying official role must doso in writing, utilizing the delegation of authority form found onthe IQCS website (https://iqcsweb.nwcg.gov/).” o Under subheading “Incident Qualification Card “:  Added BLMto the bullet regarding, “An electronic incident qualification card utilizing the IQCS portable document format (PDF) with electronic signature is authorized.”  Added BIAto the bullet regarding, “An electronic incident qualification card utilizing the IQCS portable document format (PDF) with electronic signature is authorized.” o Added FWSto the bullet under subheading “Incident Qualification Card Expiration Dates” regarding, “WCTis valid for13-months from the date passed. RT-130is valid for13-months from the date completed.” • Under heading “Medical Examinations”: o Clarified FS-specific text regarding, “As with DOI agencies, an employee maybe required to take a medical examination whenever there isa reasonable concern, based on objective evidence, about the employee’s continued capacity to meet anyof the physical or medical requirements ofthe position. Such an examination maybe ordered for instances ofjob-related injuries/illnesses and for those that are not job- related. Supervisors should contact the Medical Qualifications Program medical officers for assistance and guidance regarding howto proceed. See the USFS Light and Moderate Medical Process orthe Arduous Medical Process (AMP) Implementation Guide onthe Wildland Firefighter Medical Qualifications found at https://www.fs.usda.gov/managing-land/fire/safety/emedical.” o Under subheading “Arduous Fitness Level – Department ofthe Interior Wildland Firefighter Medical Standards Program (DOI MSP)”:  Inserted FS-specific bullet regarding, “All positions which require an arduous qualification must participate ina medical clearance process through the Medical Qualifications Program (MQP). This policy does not apply to cooperating agency wildland firefighters or contractors. Personnel must receive a version ofthe “Medically Qualified” determination from the MQP staff before participating inthe arduous WCTor performing the duties ofa firefighter. Refer to current agency direction at https://www.fs.usda.gov/managing-land/fire/safety/emedical.” o Under subheading “Examination/Self-Certification Periodicity and Changes in Medical Status”:  Inserted FS-specific bullet regarding, “See Change in Medical Status inthe AMP Implementation Guide for more specific information (https://www.fs.usda.gov/managing-land/fire/safety/emedical).”  Inserted BLM-specific bullet regarding, “Ifa law enforcement officer seeks an arduous wildland firefighter qualification, an additional medical clearance for wildland firefighting must be requested. Ifa determination of “not qualified” is made, the DOI MSP risk mitigation/waiver process will be used. Both actions will be initiated bythe Law Enforcement Medical Standards Officer.” o Under subheading “Medical Examination Process for Light and Moderate Fitness Levels”:  Removed FS-specific text regarding, “Medical exams will be paid from a Washington Office fund code.” Inserted, “Refer tothe Light and Moderate Medical Process Guide (https://www.fs.usda.gov/managing-land/fire/safety/emedical).”  Inserted BLM-specific text regarding, “Law enforcement officers must be found medically qualified, or qualified with waiver, and pass the Law Enforcement Physical Efficiency Battery test to have the law enforcement physical fitness standards be equivalent tothe “Moderate” and “Light” work category.”
 Removed FS-specific text regarding, “The completed OF-178is submitted tothe reviewing medical officer for the agency to review and medically clear.” Inserted, “Refer tothe Light and Moderate Medical Process Guide (https://www.fs.usda.gov/managing-land/fire/safety/emedical).” • Under heading “Work Capacity Tests”: o Subheading “Physical Fitness Levels”:  Inserted BLM-specific text under the “Arduous” bullet regarding, “Law enforcement officers must obtain and present a Wildland Firefighter Determination certificate before participating inthe Arduous WCT.”  Inserted BLM-specific text under the “Moderate” bullet regarding, “Law enforcement physical fitness standards are acceptable as equivalent toa “Moderate” WCT work category.” o Under subheading “Work Capacity Test Administration”:  Added FWSto the bullet regarding, “Currency for WCT is13 months.”  Clarified text regarding, “WCT results shall be documented and may capture information covered under the Privacy Act and should be maintained in accordance with agency Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) guidelines. See the NWCG Work Capacity Test Administrator’s Guide, PMS 307, fora Sample Work Capacity Test (WCT) Data Sheet.”  Clarified FS-specific text regarding, “Failed ornot completed WCT attempts areto be entered into the eMedical system bythe HSQ coordinator.” o Clarified FS-specific text under subheading “Work Capacity Test – Retesting” regarding, “One opportunity for temporary employees required to pass a test (a second chance maybe provided atthe discretion of fire management). Direction canbe found inthe NWCG Work Capacity Test (WCT) Administrator’s Guide (PMS 307, http://www.nwcg.gov/publications/307).” • Removed BIA-specific text under heading “Interagency Hotshot Crews,” subheading “Interagency Hotshot Crew Policy” regarding, “IHC superintendents and assistant superintendents are required to have the additional qualification of interagency hotshot superintendent (IHCS) and/or assistant hotshot superintendent (IHCA) on their incident qualification card prior to mobilization. Additional information regarding this standard canbe found inthe Federal Wildland Fire Qualifications Supplement (https://iqcsweb.nwcg.gov/).” • Inserted BLM-specific text below the table under heading “Wildland Fire Modules” regarding, “Guidance for position descriptions and selective placement factors canbe found at https://doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/blm- fa/SitePages/BLM-0456-Series-Toolbox.aspx.” • Under heading “Chainsaw Operators and Fallers”: o Moved the following text down inthe section:  “The final certification ofall wildfire faller positions will remain the responsibility ofthe IQCS certifying official.”  “All wildland fire saw operation qualifications are maintained through IQCS and displayed onthe incident qualification card.” o Clarified BLM-specific text regarding, “The individual tasks required for completion ofthe FAL1 PTB must be evaluated bya qualified FAL1. The final evaluator’s verification fora FAL1 trainee must be completed byany agency Faller Evaluator (FALV) or equivalent. FALV position requirements canbe found at https://doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/blm-fa/fire-operations/SitePages/Chainsaw- Operations.aspx.” o Inserted FWS-specific text regarding, “The final certification ofall wildfire faller positions will remain the responsibility ofthe IQCS certifying official.” o Inserted FWS-specific text regarding, “All wildland fire saw operation qualifications are maintained through IQCS and displayed onthe incident qualification card.” o Changed BIA table column heading from “CPR” to “First Aid and CPR.” o Removed BIA table column heading “First Aid and Bloodborne Pathogens” and associated text. o Removed BIA-specific text regarding, “The possession of emergency response capabilities canbe fulfilled through oneof the following two options: 1) Crews will minimally possess oneor more individuals who are currently certified to administer CPR and provide first aid. 2) Ifthe crew does not possess this capability, other provisions must be made bythe supervisor to provide these services while engaged in chainsaw operations.” Inserted, “All BIA/Tribal sawyers, including AD's, will maintain first aid and CPRas outlined inthe preceding chart.”
Chapter 14 – Firefighting Equipment • Inserted FWS-specific text under heading “Firefighting Engines,” subheading “Fire Engine Staffing” regarding, “For type 4 engines, minimum staffing is three individuals oneof which is engine boss qualified.” • Under heading “All-Terrain Vehicles/Utility-Terrain Vehicles”: o Clarified BLM-specific text regarding, “. . . The State directors, assistant directors, and the Director, National Operations Center have the authority to approve exceptions to this policy ona case-by-case basis. . . .” o Inserted BIA-specific text regarding, “BIA and Tribal UTV operators must enroll in, and complete, a certified Recreational Off-Highway Vehicle Association (ROHVA) operators’ program and attain a completion certificate. Alternatively, employees can also take UTVO training from a qualified BIA/Tribal staff member who has competed and been certified asa ROHVA instructor. These certifications should be entered as supporting documentation in IQCS and may be subject to audit during preparedness reviews. . . .” o Under subheading “Required PPE, ” topic “UTV Head Protection for Wildland Fire Operations”:  Removed text regarding American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Z90.1.  Removed BIA-specific text regarding ANSI Z90.1. Chapter 15 – Communications • Inserted BLM-specific text under heading “Policy” regarding, “Bureau of Land Management Radio Communications Manual (MS-1292), BLM Radio Frequency Authorization Manual (MS-1291), Frequency Authorizations Handbook (H-1291-1), Communications Tower Climbing Program Handbook (H-1292-1), Radio Frequency Exposure Awareness Handbook (H-1292-2), Radio Site facilities Standards Handbook (H- 1292-3). https://doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/blm-fa- nros/SitePages/Radio%20Manuals%20and%20Handbooks.aspx.” • Under heading “Cellular/Smartphone/Satellite Phone Communications”: o Removed text regarding, “Cellular/smartphone/satellite telephones will notbe used to communicate tactical or operational traffic unless no other means are available. Cellular/smartphone/satellite telephones will notbe used for flight following in lieu of normal flight following procedures. Telephone/smartphone/satellite communications maybe used for logistical purposes.” o Inserted, “Cellular/smartphone/satellite telephones maybe used to supplement tactical or operational traffic using agency approved applications. Cellular/smartphone/satellite telephones will notbe used for flight following in lieu of normal flight following procedures. Telephone/smartphone/satellite communications/applications maybe used for logistical purposes (TAK, PTToC, etc.).” • Under heading “Radio Contracts”: o Removed text regarding, “Radios used for fire and aviation activities must be approved bythe National Interagency Incident Communication Division (NIICD). Information on contracts, software, hardware requirements, and approved radios is available onthe NIICD website (https://www.nifc.gov/resources/NIICD) or contact your agency Telecommunications Department orthe NIICD engineer at (208) 387-5720.” Inserted, “Radios used for fire and aviation activities must be identified onthe Fire Approved Radio list. The Approved Radios List is available onthe NIICD website (https://www.nifc.gov/resources/NIICD) or contact your agency Telecommunications Department orthe NIICD engineer at (208) 387-5720.” o Removed BLM-specific bullet regarding, “For information onBLM contracts, software, and hardware requirements and approved radios, contact the National Radio Operations Section (FA-332) at (208) 387- 5881.” • Under heading “Radio Frequency Management”: o Removed text regarding, “Frequency-modulated (FM) and amplitude-modulated (AM) frequencies are approved and assigned bya designated Washington Office (WO) Frequency Manager and managed by State and local communications officers. Frequencies shall notbe transmitted without written permission from formally appointed frequency management personnel atthe local, state, regional, or national level.” o Inserted text regarding, “Prior to their use and transmission, all frequency-modulated (FM) and amplitude- modulated (AM) frequencies require permission from their formally appointed frequency management personnel atthe local, state, regional, or national level.” • Under heading “Incident Frequency Management”: o Clarified text regarding, “Frequencies for incidents are assigned bythe NIFC CDO and are managed bya qualified communications unit leader (COML).” o Clarified text regarding, “Incidents that donot have an assigned COML, will coordinate and request all frequency and communication equipment needs through the COMC and/orthe NIFC CDO.” o Inserted subheading “National Interagency Fire Tactical Frequencies” and associated text.
• Under heading “Smokejumper and Rappel/RADS Air-to-Ground Frequency (168.5500 MHz)”: o Inserted text regarding, “This frequency isnot approved for ground tactical operations (line of sight) on incidents asa tactical or intra-crew channel.” o Subheading “Governmentwide Area Common User Frequencies (163.1000 MHz, 168.3500 MHz)”:  Inserted text regarding, “Permission touse these frequencies for incident use, requires submitting a request using the proper IROC ordering procedure from the NIFC CDO.”  Removed subheading “National Interagency Fire Tactical Frequencies” and associated text. • Under heading “Incident Radio Support”: o Removed text referencing the National Incident Radio Support Cache (NIRSC) and inserted National Interagency Incident Communication Division (NIICD). o Clarified text regarding, “All National Interagency Incident Communication Division (NIICD) communications equipment will be returned to NIFC immediately after the incident is turned over tothe local jurisdictional agency unless otherwise coordinated with the NIICD CDO/COMC.” Chapter 16 – Aviation Operations and Resources • Under heading “Organizational Responsibilities”: o Bureau of Indian Affairs:  Clarified text regarding, “The BIA Aviation Branch Office is responsible for supporting all BIA aviation operations within Indian Affairs through an active and professional aviation organization that:. . . .”  Inserted bullet regarding, “For policy, guidance, and responsibilities refer to Indian Affairs Manual, Part 57, DOI Departmental Manual, Parts 112, 350, 351, 352, and 353, and the BIA National Aviation Plan.”  Inserted bullet regarding, “Works with the BIA Aviation Branch Office for planning and ordering ofUAS modules. The BIA regional office is responsible reassigning and movement of assigned UAS modules within their regional jurisdiction in coordination with the BIA Aviation Branch Office, local dispatch centers, and interagency aviation managers.” o Under subheading “State/Regional Office”:  Clarified BLM-specific text regarding, “. . . SAMs are designated asthe contracting officer’s representative (COR) for all exclusive-use aircraft hosted by their state. . . .”  Removed BIA-specific text referencing “NAO” and inserted “Aviation Branch Office.” o Under subheading “Local Office”:  Removed BIA-specific text regarding, “May serve asthe COR for BIA exclusive-use aircraft on their agency/unit if aircraft manager isnot current or qualified as such.”  Inserted BIA-specific bullet regarding, “May serve asthe COR for BIA aviation exclusive use contracts within the respective region ifthe aircraft manager isnot current or qualified as such. CORs of exclusive use contracts must have a signed appointment letter from the Contracting Officer.”  Inserted BIA-specific bullet regarding, “Will serve asthe Project Manager (PM) for “on call and CWN” aviation contracts within the regional jurisdiction. All CORs will be approved bythe BIA Aviation Branch Office and communications will be coordinated through the Aviation Branch Office.” • Clarified BIA-specific text under heading “Aviation Information Resources” regarding, “BIA National Aviation Plan (NAP) and applicable aviation guides are references inthe NAP, IAM part 57, andDM 112, 350-353.” • Under heading “Interim Flight and Duty Limitations/Aviation Stand Downs”: o Subheading “Interim Flight and Duty Limitations Implementation”:  Removed existing text.  Inserted “What isthe Intent?” and associated text.  Inserted “To Whom Dothe Limitations Apply?” and associated text.  Inserted “Flight and Duty Limitations Evaluation Criteria and Information” and associated text.  Inserted “Phase 1 – Standard Flight and Duty Limitations (Reference Applicable Contract for Contractor Personnel Duty Limitations)” and associated text.  Inserted “Phase 2 – Interim Duty Limitations” and associated text.  Inserted “Phase 3 – Interim Duty Limitations” and associated text.  Inserted text regarding the process to implement interim flight and duty limitations atthe geographic area and NMAC. • Under heading “Aviation Assets”: o Clarified text regarding, “Typical agency aviation assets include helitack, rappel, short-haul, aerial supervision (ATGS), helicopter coordinator (HLCO), leadplane, aerial supervision module (ASM), large (multi-engine) airtankers (LAT), very large airtankers (VLAT), single engine airtankers (SEAT), scoopers, and smokejumpers.”
o Clarified BIA-specific text regarding, “The BIA Sensor Enhanced Air Attack aircraft personnel will work with GACCs and BIA Aviation Branch Office for coordination, movement, and ordering of such resources.” • Under heading “Helitack”: o Subheading “Organization – Crew Size”:  Clarified BLM-specific text regarding, “The baseline staffing fora BLM exclusive-use type 3 helicopter is11 personnel. The baseline staffing fora BLM exclusive-use type 2 helicopter is13 personnel. . . Recommended staffing levels for BLM exclusive-use helitack crews is outlined inthe BLM Fire 0456 Series User Guide, https://doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/blm-fa/SitePages/BLM-0456- Series-Toolbox.aspx. . . .”  Removed existing BIA-specific text and inserted, “For exclusive use helitack crew size standards, see the NAP, appendices, and Exclusive Use Helicopter Module Position Standards. On-call helitack and all helicopter personnel responsibilities are outlined inthe NWCG Standards for Helicopter Operations (PMS 510, https://www.nwcg.gov/publications/510). All helitack training and currency requirements are contained inthe PMS 310-1. Each region hosting exclusive-use/on-call helicopters is responsible for providing essential management, overhead, equipment, facilities, and the resources necessary to fully support the helitack crew. Host regions are encouraged to increase helitack crew size minimum requirements to enhance operational efficiency and effectiveness. All exclusive use helicopter programs are required touse the OPM approved GS-0456 series organizational chart. The Aviation Branch Office recommends the11 crew size organizational chart foran exclusive use type 3 helicopter program. Minimum daily operational staffing levels will comply with PMS 510 standards. - Exclusive Use Minimum:  Type 3 helicopter -10 helitack personnel  Type 2 helicopter - 12 helitack personnel” o Subheading “Transportation”:  Removed BLM-specific text regarding, “Minimum vehicle configuration fora seven-person crew will consist ofone class-661 helitack support vehicle and one class-156or class-166 vehicle.”  Clarified BIA-specific text regarding, “Minimum vehicle configuration foran 11 person crew will consist ofone class-661 helitack support vehicle and one class-156or class-166 vehicle, A choice of additional vehicle(s) funded through the region canbe obtained to ensure adequate space for helitack module.” • Under heading “Aerial Supervision Principles for ATGS, HLCO, ASM, and Leadplane”: o Inserted text regarding, “Aerial supervision resources will be dispatched when available to initial- /extended-attack incidents in order to enhance safety, effectiveness, and efficiency of aerial/ground operations. The objective isto minimize the instances of airtankers and helicopters operating inthe fire traffic area (FTA) without aerial supervision.” o Clarified text regarding, “In accordance with PMS 505, NWCG Standards for Aerial Supervision, when aerial supervision resources areco-located with fixed-wing aircraft, they will be dispatched together unless the required aerial supervision is currently on scene ofthe incident oris being dispatched from another location. Examples of appropriate aerial supervision can include ATGS, ASM, and/or leadplane.” • Under heading “Airtankers”: o Clarified text regarding, “Host GACCs will check with NICC prior to releasing flight crews on LATs, VLATs and scoopers for the day when those resources are not being used within the host area and could be utilized elsewhere for emerging or ongoing fire activity.” o Clarified text regarding, “LATs primarily are initial attack capable without leadplane/ASM supervision. VLATs require leadplane/ASM supervision tobe on scene prior to arriving onthe fire.” o Subheading “Airtanker Types”:  Clarified,” Very large airtankers – 6,000 gallons or more.”  Clarified, “Type 1 – 3,000to 5,999 gallons.” o Subheading “Very Large Airtankers”:  Removed existing text.  Inserted, “Very Large Airtankers (VLATs) have some unique operational considerations including low-level supervision, terrain, airtanker base ramp operations and operations inthe fire traffic area (FTA). - Leadplane/ASM supervision will beon scene prior to arriving onthe fire. - Aerial supervision (leadplane orASM) is required by contract and interagency policy for VLATs while dropping retardant. - Aerial supervisors will have the technical expertise to determine ifthe VLAT isthe right tool for the terrain and objectives.
- VLATs minimum drop height is250 feet above the ground or canopy cover whichever is higher. Generally, drop heights should increase when using higher coverage levels. - VLATs require considerably more space and clearance from other aircraft within the FTA and more time toset upfor drops.” - Airtanker bases approved for VLATs are listed inthe NWCG Airtanker Base Directory.” • Clarified text under heading “Large and Very Large Airtanker Coordination” regarding, “National coordination and management ofFS-contracted airtankers and scoopers is required to ensure there is airtanker and scooper coverage, response, and capability nationwide. TheFS Airtanker Program Manager andFS Fixed-wing Coordinator coordinate and manage airtanker and scooper readiness and availability, capability, and response with vendors, national aviation staff, and NICC.” • Under heading “Airtanker Base Operations”: o Clarified text regarding, “All permanent and temporary bases will have an airtanker base operations plan (ABOP), anda qualified ATBM prior to operations outof the airtanker base airport.” o Clarified text regarding, “All personnel conducting airtanker base operations shall review the SABO and have it available. ATBMs are authorized to manage SEATs.” o Under subheading “Airtanker Base Personnel”:  Clarified, “There is identified training for the positions at airtanker bases. The PMS 310-1 lists required training for these positions.”  Inserted text regarding, “. . .The ATBM has ultimate authority and responsibility over all operations atthe airtanker base. . . .” • Clarified text under heading “Multi-Engine Water Scoopers” regarding, “FS-contracted multi-engine water scoopers are national resources. Geographic areas administering these aircraft will make them available for initial attack and extended attack fires ona priority basis. A water scooper manager will need tobe ordered bythe unit requesting water scoopers. The National Airtanker Program Manager, who has oversight responsibility for the multi-engine water scoopers, will have a list of available managers. The manager will beon site to coordinate water scooper operations, logistics, and water-body assessment.” Chapter 17 – Fuels Management • Under heading “Reporting Planned Fuels Treatments Burned ina Wildfire”: oFor BLM:  Clarified bullet regarding, “BLM offices will report all acres burned ina naturally caused wildfire that meet resource objectives in IFPRS when the following criteria have been met:”  Clarified bullet regarding, “An agency administrator approves the determination and the office will notify the State fuels lead/specialist. Together they ensure appropriate reporting in IFPRS.”  Inserted, “Offices will create a polygon in IFPRS encompassing only the acres ofthe wildfire that meet resource objectives. The IFPRS Category will beset to "Unplanned Ignition" and the Type will be "Wildfire."  Clarified text regarding, “See instructions inthe BLM Fuels Management and Community Assistance Handbook, H-9214-1as well asthe BLM IFPRS Business Rules.” o Removed FWS from bullets regarding, “Acres burned ina wildfire may only be reported inthe NFPORS HFR module as “fire use” ifall the following conditions are met.” oFor FWS:  Inserted bullet regarding, “Acres burned ina wildfire may only be reported in IFPRS within these treatment categories: biological, chemical, mechanical, or planned ignition, and then with a “wildfire” treatment type only ifall the following conditions are met: - The area burned is preidentified (with polygon) within the three-year program of work. - The preidentified objectives associated with the treatment were accomplished. - Relevant pre-treatment compliance is complete.” • Under heading “Reporting of Wildfire Acres That Meet Resource Management Objectives”: o Clarified BLM-specific text regarding, “Reporting will take place in IFPRS.” o Clarified FWS-specific text regarding, “Reporting will take place in InFORM.” Chapter 18 – Reviews and Investigations • Clarified text under subheading “Fire and Aviation Safety Team Review” regarding, “See appendix Ifor sample FAST delegation of authority.” • Clarified text under subheading “Lessons Learned Review” regarding, “The LLR facilitator will convene the participants and obtain a delegation of authority from appropriate agency level. See appendix Gfor a sample LLR delegation of authority.”
• Under heading “Wildland Fire Accident Investigation Process,” inserted DOI bullet regarding, “All DOI aviation accident and incident investigations are conducted in accordance with 352DM 3and the DOI Aircraft Mishap Notification, Investigation, and Reporting Handbook.” • Under heading “Wildland Fire Serious Accident Investigation Process,” inserted DOI bullet regarding, “All DOI aviation accident and incident investigations are conducted in accordance with 352DM 3and the DOI Aircraft Mishap Notification, Investigation, and Reporting Handbook.” • Under heading “Related Policy Documents”: oRow “DOI,” column, “Safety” – Inserted text regarding, “352DM 3and DOI Aircraft Mishap Notification, Investigation, and Reporting Handbook.” Chapter 19 – Dispatch and Coordination System • Throughout the chapter, removed reference to dispatch reference materials in appendix P, and inserted appendix L. • Clarified text under subheading “Management of National Support Resources” regarding, “NICC mobilizes national support resources such as National Interagency Incident Communications Division (NIICD) radio systems and kits, incident remote automatic weather stations (RAWS), project remote automatic weather stations, national contract mobile food services, and national contract mobile shower facilities. Refer tothe National Interagency Standards for Resource Mobilization for more information.” Appendices • Appendix Eo Removed Wildland Fire Risk and Complexity Assessment text and incorporated information and hyperlinks into the chapters. o Renamed appendix Sample Delegations of Authority Agency Administrator toIMT and Leader’s Intent, which was previously appendix G. • Appendix Fo Removed text for Indicators of Incident Complexity. Incorporated text and hyperlinks into the chapters. o Renamed appendix Local Incident Commander Briefing toIMT, which was previously appendix H. • Appendix Go Renamed appendix Sample Delegation – Lessons Learned Review (LLR), which was previously appendix J. • Appendix Ho Renamed appendix Recommendations for Incident Emergency Medical Services, which was previously appendix K. • Appendix Io Removed existing text regarding Incident Management Team Performance Evaluation, and inserted text and hyperlink into chapter 11, subheading “Team Evaluation.” o Renamed appendix Sample Delegation of Authority – FAST, which was previously appendix L. • Appendix Jo Renamed appendix Area Command (AC) Complexity Assessment, which was previously appendix M. • Appendix Ko Renamed appendix Wildland Fire Decision Support System Information, which was previously appendix N. • Appendix Lo Renamed appendix Dispatch Reference, which was previously appendix P. o Removed text under heading “Required Reference Materials” regarding, “National Incident Radio Support Cache (NIRSC) User’s Guide,” and inserted, “National Interagency Incident Communications Division (NIICD) User’s Guide.” • Appendix Mo Removed. • Appendix No Removed. • Appendix Oo Removed. o Removed text regarding work capacity test record. In chapter 13 under “Work Capacity Test Administration” subheading, inserted, “See the NWCG Work Capacity Test Administrator’s Guide, PMS 307, fora Sample Work Capacity Test (WCT) Data Sheet.” • Appendix Po Removed.
Risk Management Identify Hazards (Situation Awareness) • Gather Information □ Objective(s) □ Communication □ Who’sin Charge □ Previous Fire Behavior □ Weather Forecast □ Local Factors • Scout the Fire Assess Hazards • Estimate Potential Fire Behavior Hazards □ Look Up/Down/Around Indicators • Identify Tactical Hazards □ Watch Outs • As conditions change, what other safety hazards are likely to exist? • Consider probability versus severity? Develop Controls and Make Risk Decisions • Develop control measures that reduce risk: □ Firefighting Orders  LCES ̶ Anchor Point ̶ Downhill Checklist (if applicable) □ What other controls are necessary? ̶ Engineering/Administrative ̶ PPE ̶ Educational ̶ Avoidance □ Emergency Medevac Procedures/Plan • Are controls in place to mitigate risk? □ NO - Reassess situation □ YES - Next question • Are selected tactics based on expected fire behavior? □ NO - Reassess situation □ YES - Next question • Have instructions been given and understood? □ NO - Reassess situation □ YES - Next question • Consider risk versus gain Implement Controls • Ensure controls arein place and being implemented by personnel. • Ensure controls are integrated operational plan and understood atall levels. Supervise and Evaluate • Are controls adequately mitigating the hazards? □ NO – Reassess and consider: ̶ Human Factors: ○ Low experience level? ○ Distracted from primary tasks? ○ Fatigue or stress reaction? ○ Unsafe attitude? ̶ The Situation: ○ What is changing? ○ Are strategy and tactics working? If situation changes significantly, restart Risk Management Process atthe appropriate step.
Standard Firefighting Orders 1. Keep informed on fire weather conditions and forecasts. 2. Know what your fire is doing atall times. 3. Base all actions on current and expected behavior ofthe fire. 4. Identify escape routes and safety zones and make them known. 5. Post lookouts when there is possible danger. 6. Be alert. Keep calm. Think clearly. Act decisively. 7. Maintain prompt communications with your forces, your supervisor and adjoining forces. 8. Give clear instructions and insure they are understood. 9. Maintain control of your forces atall times. 10. Fight fire aggressively, having provided for safety first. Watch Out Situations 1. Fire not scouted and sized up. 2. In country not seen in daylight. 3. Safety zones and escape routes not identified. 4. Unfamiliar with weather and local factors influencing fire behavior. 5. Uninformed on strategy, tactics, and hazards. 6. Instructions and assignments not clear. 7. No communication link with crew members/supervisor. 8. Constructing fireline without safe anchor point. 9. Building fireline downhill with fire below. 10. Attempting frontal assault on fire. 11. Unburned fuel between you and fire. 12. Cannot see main fire, notin contact with anyone who can. 13. Ona hillside where rolling material can ignite fuel below. 14. Weather is getting hotter and drier. 15. Wind increases and/or changes direction. 16. Getting frequent spot fires across line. 17. Terrain and fuels make escape to safety zones difficult. 18. Taking nap near fireline.
