Reporting fire in Australia’s forests and vegetation D.J. Walsh, K.E. Rumba, J., Hoare, M. Parsons andR. Thackway April 2007
© Commonwealth of Australia 2007 This work is copyright. Apart from any use as permitted under the Copyright Act 1968, no part maybe reproduced byany process without prior written permission from the Commonwealth. Requests and inquiries concerning reproduction and rights should be addressed tothe Commonwealth Copyright Administration, Attorney General’s Department, Robert Garran Offices, National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600 or posted at http://www.ag.gov.au/cca. The Australian Government acting through the Bureau of Rural Sciences has exercised due care and skill inthe preparation and compilation ofthe information and data set out in this publication. Notwithstanding, the Bureau of Rural Sciences, its employees and advisers disclaim all liability, including liability for negligence, for any loss, damage, injury, expense or cost incurred byany person asa result of accessing, using or relying upon anyof the information or data set out in this publication tothe maximum extent permitted bylaw. Postal address: Bureau of Rural Sciences GPO Box 858 Canberra, ACT 2601 Copies available from: BRS Publication Sales GPO Box 858 Canberra ACT 2601 Ph: 1800 020 157 Fax: 02 6272 2330 Email: salesbrs@brs.gov.au Internet: http://www.brs.gov.au Preferred citation: Walsh, D.J., Rumba, K.E., Hoare, J., Parsons, M., and Thackway R. 2006. Reporting Fire in Australia’s Forests and Vegetation. Bureau of Rural Sciences, Canberra. Acknowledgements The first draft of this report was prepared in 2001. To update and finalise itin 2006, sections about each State, Territory and fire agency were sent to people in those agencies. The authors thank the people in those agencies who provided advice and comments. The authors also thank Phil Cheney for advice and comments onan early draft.
CONTENTS Executive summary.........................................................................................iii1. Fire and Australia’s forests and vegetation...............................................41.1 Background...............................................................................................................41.2 Reporting fire in Australia’s forests and vegetation.............................................51.3 Project Aims:............................................................................................................62. Australian fire incident reporting, data collection and datasets..............62.1 Australian Government...........................................................................................62.2 Tasmania...................................................................................................................72.2.1 Parks and Wildlife Service and Forestry Tasmania.............................................72.2.2 Tasmania Fire Service.........................................................................................92.3 Victoria....................................................................................................................112.3.1 Department of Sustainability and Environment................................................112.3.2 Country Fire Authority......................................................................................122.4New South Wales....................................................................................................122.4.1NSW Rural Fire Service....................................................................................122.4.2 Forests NSW......................................................................................................132.4.3 Parks and Wildlife Service................................................................................142. 5 South Australia......................................................................................................152.5.1 National Parks and Wildlife Service.................................................................152.5.2 Country Fire Service..........................................................................................162.5.3 ForestrySA.........................................................................................................162.6 Western Australia...................................................................................................182.6.1 Department of Conservation and Land Management........................................182.6.2 Department of Land and Administration...........................................................19i
2.6.3 Fire and Emergency Services Authority of Western Australia.........................192.7 Queensland..............................................................................................................192.7.1 Queensland Parks and Wildlife Service............................................................202.7.2 Department of Primary Industries.....................................................................222.7.3 Queensland Fire and Rescue Service.................................................................242.8 Northern Territory.................................................................................................242.8.1 Northern Territory Parks and Wildlife Commission.........................................242.9 Australian Capital Territory.................................................................................262.9.1A.C.T. Emergency Services Authority..............................................................262.9.2A.C.T. Rural Fire Service..................................................................................263. Discussion and conclusions.....................................................................263.1 Importance of fire monitoring and reporting......................................................263.2 Monitoring and reporting systems........................................................................273.3 Options to ensure national monitoring and reporting in future........................29 Abbreviations and glossary..........................................................................31 References......................................................................................................33 Appendix 1: National Forest Inventory forest classes and areas (hectares) by State ........................................................................................................................................36 Appendix 2: Queensland Parks and Wildlife fire history datasets..........................39ii
Executive summary The Australian Government hasa number of policies that require information on health and vitality or condition of forests and other vegetation. Because itis not practical to assess the health and condition ofall forests and vegetation, indicators for which data canbe practically collected are used. Indicators are used for this purpose inthe Montreal Process, State ofthe Environment reporting and National Monitoring and Evaluation Framework. For example, Montreal Process indicator 3.1is ‘area and per cent of forest affected by processes or agents beyond the range of historic variation’. Fire isan integral part ofthe ecosystem processes that determine floristics, diversity and structure of Australian forests and other vegetation. Fire regimes and fire management practices can affect the health and condition of forest and vegetation types in beneficial or detrimental ways. Monitoring and reporting fire and its impacts is therefore an important part of monitoring vegetation. Monitoring and reporting fire and its impacts on forests and vegetation requires regularly collecting data and information on fire extent, intensity and frequency and access to equivalent information on vegetation extent, type, use management and condition. Regular monitoring and reporting ofthe relationship between fire regimes and the relationship to forests and vegetation is essential to develop an understanding ofthe ecological sustainability of current fire regimes and fire management practices. This report assesses whether the information reported on fire in Australia’s forests and vegetation is sufficient in terms of quality, completeness and availability to enable reporting on Montreal Process indicator 3.1. The assessment shows that the Montreal Process indicator 3.1 cannot be practically reported atthe national scale. A coordinated and standardised national approach is needed to gather accurate data to report fire data, including intensity and/or damage indices that allows for spatial comparison with vegetation mapping and identified community fire sensitivity. No State or Territory agency can currently report ina way that would provide anup to date, comprehensive and meaningful analysis. The report discusses a number of cost-effective options to implement a coordinated and standardised national approach to future gathering of appropriate fire data that would enable meaningful national assessment ofthe impacts of current fire regimes. The merits of implementing a national approach to monitor and report onthe impact of fire on vegetation condition and health indicators are discussed. The most practical approach is based firstly on using the coarse resolution satellite data for relatively open-crowned forest and vegetation and secondly using higher resolution satellite data where the vegetation has denser and closed crowns. In areas with high value vegetation, satellite data can also be combined with targeted aerial photographic interpretation for accurate fire history mapping ata sufficient scale and resolution to capture small low intensity fires. While remotely sensed datasets are available, these areno substitute for ground collection of data on vegetation use and management, structure, floristics, condition and health. Predicting the impacts of changed fire regimes requires modelling fire impacts for specific projects. There is sufficient empirical research and understanding ofthe ecology of many dominant tree species to begin developing these models for many ofthe major forest types. iii1. Fire and Australia’s forests and vegetation 1.1 Background Fire regimes, that is, the frequency and intensity of fires, arean integral part ofthe ecosystem processes that determine floristics, diversity and structure of Australian forests and other vegetation (Walker and Singh 1981, Standing Committee onthe Environment and Conservation 1984, Attiwill 1994, Bradstock etal 2002). Fire canbe either beneficial or detrimental (Jurskis 2004, White and Jurskis 2004). The fire regime in many parts of Australia has altered dueto land use changes and adoption of European land management practices (Jurskis etal 2003). This has resulted in regional and community level vegetation change (Gill 1981, Attiwill 1994, Florence 1994, Jurskis 2004). The effects of wildfire on forest and vegetation vary depending onthe time since fire. Inthe short term (months) these effects are quite different to those inthe long term (decades). Inthe short term they include temporary loss of vegetation cover (eg shrubs and grasses), temporary loss of litter cover, some permanent loss of mature trees and vigorous regrowth of existing perennial trees and shrubs. Inthe longer term these effects can include thickening ofthe perennial woody vegetation of open grasslands and grassy woodlands/savannas. This canbe attributed toa number of fire regime-related processes, such as where previously sparse shrub and tree layers have increased in cover dueto a lack of regular fire (Rolls 1999). In other places dense forest communities have spread from community margins and woody weeds have colonised new areas (Rolls 1999, Gifford and Howden 2001). In many areas vegetation change has become a major conservation issue. For example, in northern Queensland, rainforest and Melaleuca forests are encroaching into wet eucalypt forests. Aerial photographs show that in some areas over 50% ofthe wet sclerophyll forests and woodlands that hada grassy understorey in 1943 now have a rainforest understorey (Harrington and Sanderson 1994, Harrington 1995). In some areas of Cape York there has been a20% decline inthe area of open grasslands over the last 10 years (Peter Thompson, Cape York Development Council, pers comm). The extent to which these processes of vegetation change have occurred nationally isnot clear because the lack of measurable and reliable information about Aboriginal and early settlement fire regimes and distribution of many vegetation communities (Benson and Redpath 1997). Once the open grassy vegetation in these tropical and subtropical environments has changed to rainforest and scrub, prescribed burning to return to open grassy woodlands isno longer achievable, except under extreme drought conditions. With encroachment and eventual understorey dominance by rainforest species, the fire regime effectively changes from frequent low intensity burning to infrequent high intensity burns. These thickening processes can also beof major importance to forest health and vitality and fire management. Asthe forest overstorey matures, competition leads toa higher proportion of trees in poor condition more susceptible to pathogens and disease. 4
There are also consequences for conservation management and species diversity where the floristics and vegetation structures of large areas change and the habitats typical of grasslands and open forest communities may become increasingly restricted (Attiwill 1994, Rolls 1999). The impacts of changes in fire regime should be considered inthe context ofthe Australian Government’s requirements to report onthe health and condition of forests and vegetation. This requires a monitoring and reporting process. 1.2 Reporting fire in Australia’s forests and vegetation Reporting onthe pattern and relationship between fire incidence and Australian forests and vegetation requires that data are collected on fire regime and vegetation type, extent and condition. Ideally, the survey design should enable comparable spatial and temporal data tobe analysed. Unfortunately, data on fire regime and vegetation type, extent and condition, are usually collected at different spatial and temporal scales thus making comparisons somewhat tenuous. Meaningful monitoring and reporting of fire and its impacts on vegetation requires data and information on fire regimes, that is, patterns of fire intensity and frequency, fuel type and seasonality, andon how these affect vegetation age classes, canopy cover, stratal segregation and species compositions. These data maybe collected for planned and unplanned fires. This is essential for understanding ecological sustainability of current fire regimes and fire management practices. Reporting fires only by area burnt annually, without including intensity and frequency, is inappropriate for Australian forests for assessment of ecological sustainability and biodiversity impacts. This has been reviewed in detail for the Australian environment by Gill etal (1999). Australia has 910 recognised vegetation communities of which 457 communities, encompassing 156 million hectares, are considered tobe forest and woodland (NFI 1998). The nature and classification of Australia’s forest communities atthe national level is discussed in detail in Australia’s First Approximation Report for the Montreal Process (MIG 1997). By applying a consistent definition of forest, the National Forest Inventory (NFI) aggregates Australia’s forest and woodland communities into 17 broad forest types comprised of64 classes. These classes are defined bythe dominant genus, height and cover. State and Territory forest management agencies routinely use these classes to translate and compile national forest information from regional and state level forest and vegetation mapping. Summary statistics for the NFI forest classes within each State and Territory are presented in Appendix 1. Reporting impacts and changes of fire regimes in these forest classes is expected to show patterns of fire regimes with changes in major species inthe overstorey. However, dueto a lack of information about floristic changes, they cannot be expected to show the effect of fire regimes inthe overstorey or understorey. To understand ecological impacts and changes inthe floristics of forest and vegetation communities would require access toa more detailed vegetation classification than the64 NFI forest classes. The National Vegetation Inventory System (NVIS), with its description of association and sub-association, levels 5and 6 respectively (NLWRA 5
2001; ESCAVI 2003), would satisfy this requirement. The NVIS framework includes both structural and floristic information required to monitor and report on forest and vegetation health and vitality, and other ecological changes dueto changes in fire regimes. 1.3 Project Aims: The aims of this project were to: 1. document the status of fire incidence datasets including fire extent mapping atthe national, State and Territory levels including both wildfires and planned fires 2. assess opportunities for establishing a national fire incidence dataset by compiling data collected by State and Territory land management agencies. 2. Australian fire incident reporting, data collection and datasets The following information has been compiled from telephone interviews and electronic communications with relevant Australian Government and respective State and Territory agency natural resource and/or data managers. This information was compiled during June and July 2001 and revised in 2005 after sending sections back to State and Territory agencies for checking. 2.1 Australian Government Reporting fire statistics and fire data collection in Australia isthe responsibility of State and Territory government agencies. Data held bythe Australian Government has usually been compiled from State and Territory agencies when needed for activities such asthe Comprehensive Regional Assessment process undertaken to develop Regional Forest Agreements, the NFI, State ofthe Forest Reports and State ofthe Environment reporting. The data has not been maintained or updated after those activities. Much of this fire related data isin the form of summaries or overviews, notat the level of detail necessary to assess fire regimes changes onthe health and vitality of forest and vegetation communities. Currently there isno consistent national fire extent dataset covering all forest and vegetation types ata uniform scale that canbe related to vegetation types. The only information that hasa national coverage is that compiled for the State ofthe Environment reporting. This isthe landscape fire extent data collected bythe Western Australian Department of Land and Administration (DOLA) and provided tothe Australian Government. While there are advantages with a national dataset which is regularly collected using a consistent method, there are inherent disadvantages with this type of remotely sensed satellite data that are symptomatic of problems in measuring, monitoring and reporting fire data ata scale that enables vegetation change tobe assessed and monitored. These problems are discussed in further detail later. Data collection is usually via fire incident reporting and statistics derived from such reporting methods. How data is collected, stored and analysed relevant to monitoring vegetation change is discussed for each ofthe major State and Territory agencies below. 6As part ofthe National Carbon Accounting System, fire masks have been compiled to interpret and classify woody vegetation in Landsat satellite images for the period 1972– 2000 (Australian Greenhouse Office 2001). 2.2 Tasmania Three agencies in Tasmania are responsible for fire reporting. The Parks and Wildlife Service (PWS), which isa division ofthe Department of Tourism, Parks, Heritage and the Arts, is responsible for national parks and conservation reserves. Forestry Tasmania (FT) is responsible for fire management within State forests, including formal and informal reserves. These agencies use the same fire incident reporting systems and databases, although each maintains its own records and geographic information system (GIS) data. The third agency, the Tasmania Fire Service (TFS), is responsible for suppressing and reporting fires on private lands. All three agencies use the TFS incident identification log that ensures a unique identification number is allocated to each fire incident. This allows tracking each incident and avoids double recording despite the differences in systems across the three agencies. 2.2.1 Parks and Wildlife Service and Forestry Tasmania FThas developed an ORACLE wildfire database called FIRES (Fire Incident Reporting and Evaluation System). This is currently (mid 2005) being upgraded to assist in data collection, storage and integration with the GIS. PWS stores its fire incident data inthe FT system so that the system effectively covers all forested public lands in Tasmania. Data are collected through fire incident reports with the monitoring of wildfires and subsequent calculation of area burnt in final fire reports coming from ground staff, or from aircraft-borne global positioning system (GPS) units inthe case of larger and/or remote fires. Inthe case of larger fires, aGPS is used tomap fire boundaries from the air ata nominal accuracy of50 m. Helicopter mounted GPSis used sometimes. Where such methods are not required, boundary recording maybe based on visual estimate, hand held GPS locations recorded onthe ground and marked on1:25000 maps orby aerial photograph interpretation (API) accurate to about 10m. FT maps the boundaries ofall wildfires in State forest using ground methods. This data is then digitised into the GIS for fire history mapping that canbe used in strategic conservation management. The fire identification numbers canbe used to refer back tothe fire incident reports in FIRES. FT policy isto show the boundary of each fire larger than 1ha inthe GIS. Smaller fires are represented bya circle. 7
Vegetation type burned is recorded using the following categories: 1. Alpine heath 2. Blackwood forest 3. Bracken 4. Button grass moor land 5. Dry sclerophyll forest/Callitris 6. Dry sclerophyll scrub/heath 7. Grassland and herbs 8. Hardwood plantation 9. Wet sclerophyll forest 10. Mixed forest (eucalypt overstorey, rainforest understorey) 11. Mountain eucalypt forest 12. Mountain/montane moor 13. Native conifer forests (King Billy pine, Athrotaxis, Podocarpus) 14. Paddocks 15. Cool temperate rainforest 16. Rainforest scrub 17. Silvicultural regeneration (mostly wet sclerophyll forest types) 18. Softwood plantation 19. Sub-alpine eucalypt woodland 20. Unburnt Dueto the relatively small scale mosaic pattern of vegetation and topography, classifying wildfires using only oneof the above categories will not accurately describe effects on particular vegetation types. Referring GIS wildfire overlays to detailed GIS vegetation overlays can overcome this to give accurate assessments ofthe areas burnt by vegetation type at more refined levels of classification of forest type. However, the GIS mapping of fires isnot linked tothe same database as that for vegetation and other API mapping work and for both agencies GIS mapping isnot upto date. This has been identified asan area requiring greater work butit may not bea high priority andis limited by available resources. Both agencies also have their own separate GIS systems. FT uses ArcInfo, whilst PWS stores much ofits fire data ina Mapinfo system. FTcan produce a full map for each wildfire, accurate to10 m2, back to 1978 and has identified the need to link the FIRES database and the GIS system so that spatial analyses of fire data canbe done within one system. 8
Each fire incident report has space to record data on fire boundary, origin, vegetation type, tenure, season fire identifying number, and fire/man-hours data. With varying reliability, fires in forest environments maybe categorised in terms of damage, ie: (1) unburnt – no scorch, (2) partial foliar scorch, (3) total foliar scorch, (4) foliar burn, (5) small branch burnt, and (6) large branches burnt. PWS has no central database for planned burns. Individual districts and parks maintain their own records and areas are strategically identified as part ofPWS management plans. FT maintains a separate information system – the coupe harvesting information system – for planned burns used for silvicultural regeneration on State forest. This isan Oracle derived system that details the area burnt, location of coupes and date of burn. Fuel reduction burns are recorded onthe GIS and will soon be integrated into FIRES. 2.2.2 Tasmania Fire Service Tasmania Fire Service (TFS) stores its data inthe Australian incident reporting system (AIRS) database, which is constructed tothe Australian Standard (AFAC 2002). AIRS isnot currently supported bya GIS and hasno information on fire damage indices or intensity other than fire weather data. For area calculation, wildfires are reported using GPS coordinates so that fire area canbe accurately assessed for larger fires, although the majority of fires that the Tasmania Rural Fire Service responds toare under 5ha and area reporting for these varies. Vegetation type burnt is reported using 23 categories, although only the category that typifies the majority ofthe vegetation is recorded. These are listed in Table 1. Asa result ofthe comprehensive regional assessment process, Forestry Tasmania has detailed GIS vegetation maps that cover most private land. PWS has access to much ofthe same data, which is held bythe Department of Primary Industries, Water and Environment. These canbe compared with collated spatial information within AIRS. However, it would require significant resources for spatial data for the larger fires tobe digitised for fire history mapping on private land. 9
Table 1: Vegetation categories inthe Australian incident reporting system for wildfire Code Vegetation type 1 Plantation 1.1 Exotic softwood 1.2 Native softwood 1.3 Native hardwood 1.4 Silvicultural regeneration 2 Native forest 2.1 Native forest – rainforest 2.2 Native forest – sclerophyll forest greater than 50m height 2.3 Native forest – sclerophyll forest 35 – 50m height 2.4 Native forest – sclerophyll forest 15 – 35m height 2.5 Native forest – sclerophyll forest less than 15m height 2.6 Native forest – all conifer forest 3 Other vegetation types 3.1 Mallee 3.2 Savanna 3.3 Hummock grasslands (spinifex and button grass) 4 Alpine 4.1 Alpine woodland and herb-field 4.2Sub alpine woodland 5Low scrub/heaths 5.1 Heath-lands/wallum 6 Grasslands 6.1 Improved grasslands and pasture 6.2 Native pastures 7.1 Crops 8.1 Orchards and vineyards 08 Vegetation type not known 09.9 Vegetation type not above 9.9 Insufficient information to classify 00 Vegetation not reported 102.3 Victoria Victoria has three fire services: the Department of Sustainability and Environment (DSE), the Country Fire Authority (CFA) and the Melbourne Fire and Emergency Services Board. The latter is responsible for the Melbourne metropolitan area andis not considered further in this report. The DSE is responsible for fire management, data collection and reporting and for conservation management on public land. The CFA is responsible for the prevention and suppression of fires and for the protection of life and property in case of fire inthe rest ofthe State. 2.3.1 Department of Sustainability and Environment The Department of Sustainability and Environment is responsible for all land management issues related to public land in Victoria. All fire data information is held within the integrated fires information system (IFIS) database that replaced the fire and incident reporting system (FIRS) database. IFIS isa meta-data driven system allowing an ease of reporting and analysis of data with regard tothe attributes against which data is collected that was not achievable under the old FIRS system. IFIS is based around aweb interface with the format being defined bythe useof aSQL Server 7 database. Ithas aGIS component with spatial fire data for planned and unplanned fires being linked to tabulated fire data collected through standardised fire reporting procedures across the five DSE fire management and reporting districts. Wildfires are reported by area and forest type. Forest type is divided into six groups: 1. ash forest and high elevation mixed species 2. mixed species forest 3. box, ironbark and red gum forests 4. softwood 5. mallee and native conifer forests 6. heathland and scrub There is also a further breakdown into structural classifications. The area of individual tenures burnt is also recorded as well as whether ornot a total fire ban was in force atthe time ofthe fire. There are detailed reports on equipment and suppression techniques, as well as financial information and legal outcomes. The data go back to 1978. Being supported byGIS, analysis of fire frequency is possible. DSE provides mapped information on fire severity including the area and extent of wildfires that are generally over 5000 hectares in size. This dataset is derived primarily from Landsat 7 Thematic Mapper multispectral satellite data. Interpretation of aerial photographs supplements the dataset where Landsat data is unavailable. The combined fire severity classification is validated ona minimum number of field sites. The classification primarily differentiates crown burn (higher severity) and crown scorch (lower severity) classes of eucalypt forests, though the remote sensing method is also applied to treeless areas. In forested areas this dataset provides a reliable strategic management dataset to interpret fire effects. In treeless areas the datasets should be used asa guide only, as localised anomalies may occur. For instance, drought-affected grassland may not be reliably 11
differentiated from burnt grassland ifthe condition of each is bare soil. Used with care and with field checking, this dataset provides a reliable strategic overview of fire affected areas. 2.3.2 Country Fire Authority The CFA is responsible for control ofall fires on private land and interacts with the other agencies. For reporting purposes, the CFA uses a system called fire and incident reporting system (FIRS). This system was developed bythe CFAin 1997 andis based onthe Australian incident reporting standards. FIRS is also used by Tasmania’s Fire Service, Western Australia’s Fire and Emergency Services Authority, South Australia’s Country Fire Service and the New South Wales Rural Fire Service. A report is submitted for each fire that the CFA attends, including fires outside the CFA’s area of responsibility. The information included mainly concerns property and personal damage, suppression resources and costs. Boundaries of larger fires maybe mapped from aerial photos using infra-red side-looking radar imagery that is then transferred to computers for digitising, in some circumstances. Vegetation type and area burnt are not compulsory fields for reporting and are completed foran estimated 25% of cases. Vegetation type is identified bythe local brigades and, when this item is completed, only the majority vegetation type is reported. The data for this attribute is therefore only indicative. 2.4New South Wales The Bushfires Act 1997 gives four agencies responsibility for fire management and data collection inNew South Wales. Forests NSWis responsible for State Forests. The National Parks and Wildlife Service is responsible for National Parks and other conservation reserves. NSW Rural Fire Service, through 142 rural fire brigades, is responsible for private land. The fourth agency, the NSW Fire Brigades, is primarily focused on metropolitan areas and collects little information on vegetation affected by fire. The Bushfires Act 1997 also established a State Bushfire Coordinating Committee and Bushfire Management Committees (BMCs) across New South Wales. These committees must prepare Bushfire Risk Management Plans designed to coordinate fire risk management efforts of public and private land managers within individual BMC areas. Formulation of these plans involves three steps: nine classes of hazards are identified bya series of attributes including vegetation type, a threat mapis prepared by overlaying community and environmental assets, the management prescriptions required to reduce risk and fire incident response procedures are detailed. 2.4.1NSW Rural Fire Service Although the NSW Rural Fire Service isnot a land management agency, it maintains fire incident reports that contain data onthe area burnt by fires which it attends. The information in these reports isnot collated and centralised inone database and there is little orno mapping after fires other than that provided in situation reports. This was expected to change with the purchase and implementation ofthe Victorian CFA FIRS 12
database and reporting system – tobe termed FIREZONE inNew South Wales – across all the 142 Rural Fire Service districts. Once this system is working, it will allow for centralisation of storage of fire data from notifiable incidents and coordinated mapping of fire histories, although vegetation classification is expected to continue atthe same level, that is forest, scrub or grassland. This isthe same as that used by Forests NSW and the Parks and Wildlife Service. Area calculation for notifiable fires is based on burnt grid points marked on topographic maps using GPS methods and for larger fires, helicopter GPS methods asin Tasmania. The focus here isto provide situation reports rather than detailed post fire incident reports for land management analyses. These situation reports categorise fires by tenure and into three classes: 1. classes that involve only one agency 2. classes that require coordinated management 3. classes that require a declaration under Section 44of the Bushfire Control Act 1997 to release State funds. Map scales and map names are also recorded asare the centroid point of origin ofthe fire, where known, and the equipment and personnel committed. Damage to property and injury information is also recorded butno information is provided on fire damage indices, such as scorch height, tothe vegetation burnt. 2.4.2 Forests NSW Forests NSW maintains a database – referred toas ‘WILDFIRES’ – of information on wildfires. This has verbal information and data butno maps. The database contains upto 30 years of fire information gleaned from written reports. Many recent larger fires have been mapped. The maps have been digitised and can be linked tothe written fire reports bya unique identifier. However, this is only done when needed and that depends on particular project needs. There isno fire history mapping covering State Forest. Each fire record within WILDFIRES is given a unique identity number and information onthe size ofthe area burnt, date of fire, as well as personnel and equipment details. Ifthe forest area suffers over 70% crown scorch this is also recorded. Unlike Bushfire Services, the area burnt calculated by Forests NSWis onthe basis ofthe containment lines constructed rather than GPS and mapping of fire boundaries. Consequently there is potential to overstate the area burnt. For planned fires there isno digital spatial dataset although maps are attached to many fire incident reports. These reports are kept in district archives. Area information is collated for annual reporting atthe state level, with the number of fires and area burnt by planned and unplanned fires for each district being reported. The information on area burnt for planned fires is more reliable than that for unplanned fires because the post fire incident reporting system requires that the percentage ofthe area actually burnt is reported against the area that was planned tobe burnt. 13
Vegetation types reported in fire reports are grass, scrub or forest. No attempt is made to classify further except when needed for particular research projects. Moreover, there isno attempt made to assess what proportion ofthe area of each vegetation category is burnt. Hence the forest area burnt annually relative to scrub and grasslands burnt maybe overestimated, in addition tothe inherent overestimation from the use of containment lines asa means of delineation. 2.4.3 Parks and Wildlife Service The New South Wales Parks and Wildlife Service hasa central fire incident management system that provides situation reports for fire events toan operations centre, as well asto local offices where fire locations are recorded. These situation reports contain information on area burning or burnt assessed bya number of methods depending onthe terrain and the resources available. Where ground access is feasible, initial reporting may consist ofGPS recording of fire boundary coordinates and assessment of suppression needs. Most fires that canbe readily suppressed are, and often personnel from other districts canbe rapidly brought into assist. Fires that are left to burn are the exception rather than the rule, and this is only where weather conditions are such that the fire presents a minimal risk of continuing or where the terrain or remoteness of location dictates that suppression isnot feasible. Visual assessment of fire boundaries from helicopters is also used for recording onto topographic maps, although ArcPad and Map Master software packages maybe used from the air to allow for transferring digitised boundaries into an ArcView GIS system. The accuracy of this fire boundary mapping is high, with boundaries being mapped to within tens of metres. Vegetation information isnot recorded, nor fire attributes other than likelihood of spread. Once reported, the status ofthe fire is monitored if immediate suppression activities are not called for. Monitoring canbe via satellite imagery, where available, or periodic aircraft flights. Reporting of fire incidents canbe undertaken where required but this isa district responsibility unless part ofa specific project and depends on need and special projects being undertaken. Reports are usually inthe form ofGIS analysis of vegetation types or assets affected with some aerial photo interpretation or ground verification, depending onthe nature ofthe project. All wildfires reported and/or attended by Parks and Wildlife Service personnel are recorded inthe incident management system and situation reports are prepared. These reports donot contain information on fire damage or intensity. There is little information captured onthe patchiness ofthe fire. Where specific projects have been undertaken, information on severity or degree of damage maybe collected. That isnot typical andis restricted to district level projects. Since 1995 data on pixels burnt, and from them the area burnt, are recorded and held centrally in spreadsheets. A similar procedure is undertaken for prescribed burning. Prescribed burns are not as consistently reported. Currently, situation reports for about two-thirds ofall prescribed burns are included in central records. 14All regions maintain their own management information and have GIS systems that contain vegetation cover and strategic fire management zones, where these have been determined. Fire history data held at district levels varies in terms of period for which data has been collected or mapped; this maygo back several decades for some areas while in others data from recent fires isall that is available. Itmay also contain information on fuel loads. This isnot assessed ina standardised manner andis collected when required atthe district level and depends on local focuses and needs. Most fuel load data is collected as part ofthe process of determining the need for prescribed burning ata local level. Despite the lack of information on fire attributes that would enable assessment of vegetation impacts, mapping of recent fire histories and comparison with detailed vegetation typing is possible for all land managed bythe Parks and Wildlife Service. It requires a project tobe initiated to collate all the vegetation information held as regional level GIS cover and comparison with annual fire history mapping which is also held as shape files. Some ofthe data goes back tothe 1940s in some regions but generally most data originates from the mid 1960s. Comprehensive classification of fire events into intensity classes isnot, however, achievable because details on patchiness and/or severity of burning are highly variable, although prescribed burning and wildfire are discernible. Analysis of whether ornot current fire regimes are within or beyond the ecological tolerance ofthe community ofthe historic range of variation would require the development of modelled classification schemes using fire danger ratings and modelled fuel loads, rather than on empirical data. 2. 5 South Australia Three agencies are involved in fire data collection and analysis in South Australia: the National Parks and Wildlife Service (NPWSSA), ForestrySA and the Country Fire Service. 2.5.1 National Parks and Wildlife Service Records of most fire reports from 1975 to 2001 for the South Australian reserve system and adjacent lands are recorded in FIRESTATS, an oracle-based database. An Oracle database with aweb interface accessible only within the agency has been inuse since 2001. This database is still being developed and the earlier data will eventually be included. Developing the new database wasa cooperative effort between the NPWS and the Department of Transport, Urban Planning and Arts (DTUPA). These two departments work closely on fire history mapping in South Australia’s reserve system. The Geographical Analysis and Research Unit of DTUPA is responsible for much ofthe data storage, integration and analysis for the NPWSSA, including fire history data. This dataset provides fire scar mapping for most major fires that have occurred within South Australia’s reserve system, providing aerial photographs are available. The areas burned are digitised from false colour infra-red aerial photographs at1:40000 scale, which is considered appropriate for medium to large fires. This mapping relies on distinguishing the burnt edge onthe false colour infra-red aerial photograph. That often 15
involves subjective analysis andin some areas maybe an estimate, such as where there has been low intensity burning. Positional accuracy is about 50 metres for the larger fires. Data collection began in January 1987 andis now part ofa programme whereby false colour infra-red aerial photographs of each National Park are taken atthe endof every fire season and the burned areas detected are then digitised. Prior to 1987, fire information wasin the form of written fire reports. Data is stored as ArcInfo digital cover and paper maps. Digital data is only available for the Adelaide Hills, Flinders Ranges, Kangaroo Island, Ngarkat and Billiat National Parks. However, the programme isto be expanded andby storing itas ArcInfo shape files itcan be overlain with state- wide vegetation cover. Supporting this dataset isthe Protected Area Management System (PAMS) database that contains information for individual reserves and text information about fires in particular reserves. This information does not currently include digitised maps for wildfires or planned fuel reduction or ecological burning activities. 2.5.2 Country Fire Service The Country Fire Service SA (CFS) is responsible for all fires on private land. The CFS reports bytwo areas: the metropolitan area, encompassing Adelaide and other major metropolitan areas; the country area, which encompasses the rest ofthe state. There are different code numbers so that fires in these areas canbe distinguished. Only country area fires are relevant to vegetation management. The CFS uses the FIRS system purchased from the Victorian Country Fire Authority for reporting and data storage. The same reporting regime, methods, data fields and attributes are used. For assessing vegetation impacts, the same issues with this database apply asin Victoria. There isno pre-incident reporting or data gathering andno data collected asto planned fire burns. However, post fire validation is practised and area estimates of fires collected byGPS and topographic map referral methods are made by brigade staff. The vegetation classification used isthe same as that used bythe Tasmania Rural Fire and the Victorian Country Fire Authority, asper the Australian standard (ASO 2577). However, there isno break down ofthe different types burnt bythe fire but rather the vegetation burnt is largely described by dominant type. Also, there isno data collected asto vegetation damage indices. Currently the system isnot GIS supported but non- digitised map information is held in archived hardcopy fire incident reports. There is also no follow upAPI work asper FIRESTATS. 2.5.3 ForestrySA ForestrySA holds data on fires on state forests, which includes commercial plantations and native forest associated with the plantations. The native forest is managed by ForestrySA for conservation purposes. Most ofthe information for plantations isin spreadsheets with dates, logistic information and area burnt being given tothe CFS. Except for burning plantation debris after harvesting, ForestrySA does not use 16
prescribed burning because the main plantation species, Pinus radiata, is killed by fire. The use of prescribed burning was expected to change with the introduction of native forest management plans (see below). Most information on wildfire in plantations is held atthe regional level, although centralisation of fire incident reports isin progress. These are mostly inthe form of hardcopy reports with summary spreadsheets for individual fire seasons being prepared for annual reporting inthe context of impacts on future yield calculations. These spreadsheets summarise the number of fires, the area burnt, and the fire danger rating onthe day. The area burnt by wildfires mayin some instances be calculated byGPS and topographic methods. Aerial photography maybe undertaken for larger fires, such as that for Ash Wednesday in 1983, and GIS cover constructed to assess the effects on future timber yields. Consequently, there isno information collected with regard to damage indices. The areas burnt by wildfire are estimated by field staff by ground checking, using compartment maps. This is practical because most ofthe plantation fires are small – less than 5 hectares. The other information held within the fire reports is mainly logistical, although date, fuel type inthe area and the fire danger rating onthe dayis reported. There isa research programme into fire management for native forests. This isfor the purposes of formulating and implementing native forest management plans. Most ofthe native forest consists of remnant blocks or habitat buffers inor around plantations. Where vegetation typing from fire incident reporting has been included inGIS analysis for native vegetation, itis in accordance with the Australian Standard 2482 (Standards Australia 1989). The vegetation classification used in fire incident reporting for native forests in state forest is: 60010 Natural vegetation – general 60070 Scrub medium 60011 Shrubland 60080 Scrub scattered 60030 Forest dense 60090 Mangrove 60040 Forest medium 60100 Grassland 60050 Forest scattered 60160 Revegetated area 60051 Trees scattered 65010 Pine plantation 60060 Scrub dense 65011 Hardwood plantation Datasets other than that from fire incident reports are also used for developing conservation management plans for remnant forest blocks. This includes data from the South Australian Biological Survey and local native vegetation mapping projects. Data on unplanned fire extent and intensity (eg crown fires), past fuel reduction burning and changes in vegetation attributes are being collected and collated from these sources, as well as from oblique aerial photography and remote sensing. Information will be used to construct GIS overlays for fire extent, intensity and more refined vegetation classifications. 172.6 Western Australia Two main agencies in Western Australia are responsible for collecting fire information: the Department of Conservation and Land Management (CALM) and the Fire Emergency Service Authority of Western Australia (FESA). FESA incorporates the Fire Emergency Service and Rural Bushfire brigades. DOLA also collects fire information via its role in collecting satellite imagery data for mapping. 2.6.1 Department of Conservation and Land Management CALM manages all public land in Western Australia. Information on planned and unplanned fires is collected from a variety of sources. This information is incorporated into the FIRE SYSTEM, an oracle database viewed through aweb viewer interface. Reporting is centralised to encourage consistency. Planned and unplanned fires are reported against vegetation type. Vegetation types areat the formation level (that is, jarrah, karri, karri/tingle and mixed communities). Information on fire history with varying degrees of consistency canbe provided back to 1937. Information on fire damage indices on native vegetation isnot entered into the FIRE SYSTEM nor collected as part of routine fire reporting. However, particular research projects provide a solid understanding of typical fuel loads and the nature, behaviour and responses of fire to vegetation attributes in south west Australian forests (Gill etal 1997). The FIRE SYSTEM isGIS supported, using ArcView and ArcInfo systems. Fire area is calculated manually by aerial photograph interpretation for medium to larger fires. The area of smaller fires is often estimated onthe ground and/or from topographic maps. Data for larger fires provided bythe Department of Land and Administration Remote Sensing Unit, as part ofits Fire Scar mapping project, is used by CALM to give the area and daily rate of spread of unplanned and planned fires innon-forest and woodland environments. Inthe North Western and Goldfields regions of Western Australia the scale of planned fires is tens of thousands of hectares per year. That includes the traditional burning practices of communities as well as that of government agencies. CALM considers that information from its planned and unplanned fire reporting systems is accurate compared with other states but recognises the inherent flaws related to DOLA satellite collection methods for larger fires and fire scar mapping (this is discussed below). However, new satellites technologies becoming available (egthe Terra satellite systems) are expected to give much finer resolutions than the current NOAA systems. CALM also maintains datasets from particular projects with regard to fire management. These include data on prescribed burning in karri regrowth stands, fire history data for jarrah forests based on records of fire scars on Balga grasstrees and fire histories for particular national parks such as John Forrest and Yalgorup National Parks. 18For prescribed burning of karri regrowth stands, the database contains information about fuel characteristics (ie fuel accumulation and fuel moisture contents), fire behaviour and fire impacts on tree growth, bark thickness and incidence of stem damage in young even-aged karri regrowth stands following prescribed burning. Data was collected from January 1983 to December 1995 andis stored in spreadsheets. Data has also been collected with regard tothe effects of fire regimes on soil organic matter in jarrah and karri forests. These later two studies maybe useful as case studies for future modelling work onthe effects of fire. 2.6.2 Department of Land and Administration Atwo year project was conducted tomap fire scars throughout Australia from 1998 to 2000 using NOAA polar-orbiting satellites with thermal sensors ata 1km2 ground resolution. Although data has been collected for all of Australia, fire scar mapping and analysis has only been undertaken for Western Australia, the Northern Territory, and the tropical savanna region of northern Queensland (Munro etal 2005). The NOAA meta- data is held bythe Commonwealth. NOAA provides data on fire hotspots three times aday. However, mapping ison the basis of four pixels giving a unit size of4 km2. To collect data at lower resolutions isnot considered practical dueto the levels of noise inthe system and the ability ofthe thermal sensors to detect heat signatures. This means that only large fires canbe identified. There are also inherent problems in data capture under forest canopies and periods of high cloud cover. More effective satellite and thermal technologies, such as MODIS and Landsat high resolution imagery, have recently become available. 2.6.3 Fire and Emergency Services Authority of Western Australia FESA includes the Bush Fire Service of Western Australia and uses the FIRS system from the Victorian Country Fire Authority for reporting and data storage. The same reporting regime, methods, data fields and attributes are used. For assessing vegetation impacts, the same issues with this database apply asin Victoria. There isno pre-incident reporting or data gathering andno data collected on planned fires. When FESA staff are notified ofa fire and this turns outto bea planned fire, itis recorded asa false alarm. Wildfires are reported by area and vegetation type. Fire area is often based on ground estimate, rather than mapping orGPS verification. The system isnot supported byGIS. The vegetation classification system used isthe same as that for AIRS and FIRS for the Tasmania Rural Fire Service and the Victorian Country Fire Authority, asper the Australian standard (ASO 2577). The data submitted are often estimates. 2.7 Queensland Queensland has three main agencies with a major role in bushfire management or suppression and data collection. These are the Queensland Parks and Wildlife Service (QPWS), the Department of Primary Industries – Forestry (DPI Forestry) and the Department of Emergency Services (DES). 19
QPWS is responsible for the management ofa large proportion of native forest in Queensland including national parks, state forests and timber reserves. The total area is over 12 million ha. This includes freehold and reserves held in trust by QPWS for administrative purposes and land (freehold and other) awaiting dedication as protected area under the Nature Conservation Act 1992. DPI Forestry is responsible for state forest managed for commercial uses. This forest is mainly plantations and associated native forest buffers. The Department of Natural Resources and Mines, Department of Main Roads and Queensland Rail have fire management responsibility for almost 2 million ha, 204 000 haand 33663 ha respectively. The Department of Emergency Services, through Queensland Fire and Rescue Service (QFRS), is responsible for fire prevention onall other lands and also takes the lead role, under the Queensland Fire and Rescue Service Act 1990, for wildfire suppression. Fire management focuses on prevention, resulting in widespread and extensive prescribed burning for fuel and hazard reduction. For suppression and strategic fire management across the state the DES, through QFRS andin particular the Rural Fire Brigades, isthe lead agency. An inter-departmental committee hasa coordinating role. 2.7.1 Queensland Parks and Wildlife Service QPWS is responsible for the dedicated lands (parks and forests) under the Nature Conservation Act 1992 and Forestry Act 1959. The basic fire management strategy isto reduce risk and maintain biodiversity by planned burning. Much of Queensland's public forested land managed under the Forestry Act 1959 has been leased for grazing – approximately 4.2 million haat March 2005. Leaseholders commonly use fire to encourage grass regeneration andto open woodlands for grazing. There has been some reporting or collection of data on impacts of this practise. A NOAA satellite that senses infra-red radiation is used to find larger wildfires. It often provides the first indication of some fires in remote locations and helps to assess the scale and, over time, the movement of some ofthe larger fires. Following particular fire events, the satellite imagery for the area in question can provide some fire scar mapping which helps identify the size and scale ofthe fire. To provide more refined data, the project under wayin Cape York under the auspices ofthe Cape York Development Council has been expanded in collaboration with the Savanna CRCto cover larger areas of northern Queensland and has the potential to cover the rest of tropical Australia. The project combines NOAA satellite methods with Landsat 7 satellite imagery, which hasa ground resolution of25 metres. This higher resolution, satellite-data gathering technology, although more expensive, is used to collect fire data from areas identified as being of interest from NOAA imagery. The Landsat 7 return time is16 days, compared with twice daily for the NOAA satellite. Dense cloud cover affects both methods. Landsat 7 high resolution imagery is used to provide monthly summaries rather than for daily fire monitoring for suppression purposes. Itcan also be used to identify potential improvements to fire management practices to reduce environmental impacts. 20
Landsat 7may miss small, low-intensity fires that burn outor are suppressed quickly where an unburnt closed canopy remains. However, that is less likely than for the NOAA hot spot monitoring. Comparison between NOAA data and Landsat 7 data has shown that for Cape York NOAA hot spot monitoring only captures 30% ofthe fires seen from Landsat 7 imagery. This isdue tothe time ofthe pass and the scale of sensing. No comparison has been made with yearly or seasonal NOAA derived fire scar mapping undertaken for the Northern Territory and Western Australia. QPWS Fire Information System collects and maintains data atthe management centre level that does not depend on satellite imagery. This information is collected when needed ina reporting system and includes information about planned burning and unplanned fires. This reporting system provides location (textual/spatial), descriptor, burn type, severity, extent, status, detection/ignition date, values (natural and cultural resources, production values, etc) enhanced and threatened, wildfire control strategy, primary responsibility, resources, wildfire origin, wildfire cause, property damage, injuries, incident management team establishment, cross tenure movement, remedial actions identified, date fire out, etc.. Advice on each fire is entered initially from each management centre onto aweb-based system (Fire Advice Web, which does not have spatial data) to keep all levels of management informed of current fire activity. ParkInfo (based on ArcView), introduced in 2004, enables entry ofthe data for each planned and unplanned fire into a spatial database at each QPWS management centre. The information is collated for each district, region and state wide at least twice a year. The spatial information includes digitising the boundaries ofnew and past fires together with input from GPS and other methods such as satellite imagery that can provide a relevant shape file. This mapping of fire boundaries for fire reports is done bya number of methods, including marking boundaries onto maps from the ground orthe air, often with GPS recordings being taken. This system is well underway to providing comprehensive fire history data to cover all areas managed by QPWS. Some fire history datasets covering national parks and state forests were compiled for the Fraser Island planning process, Regional Forest Agreement processes for south east Queensland and the southern brigalow bioregions (‘Western Hardwoods Region’) and individual datasets for particular park and forest areas. Four areof regional extent and are restricted tothe southern brigalow and south east Queensland bioregions. These datasets, when combined, give comprehensive fire history mapping for public lands inthe bioregions, and may include data and maps for some fires on private land. All other digital datasets held bythe QPWS encompass information from individual aggregations of parks and forest managed bythe agency. 21
Queensland Brigalow Belt South South East Figure 1: Southern brigalow belt bioregion and south east Queensland bioregion: 2.7.2 Department of Primary Industries DPI Forestry isa commercial armof government focused on operations in plantation areas. It uses fuel reduction burning inand around plantations. Although there isno centralised fire incident reporting system, DPI Forestry districts maintain written fire incident reports and there isa centralised register ofall significant fire reports. Significance is assessed by suppression costs and resource losses as detailed onthe wildfire data forms. This register isnot supported byGIS. The reporting method is specified ina manual that details what attributes areto be reported. The attributes recorded include data on fire and weather condition, such as temperature, wind direction and speed, and drought index and fire danger rating. Available fuel, average flame height, rate of fire spread andan estimate of spotting distance are collected ifit is safe todo so. Other information that maybe collected includes a percentage estimate of scorch class (nil, moderate and severe). The ignition cause and area burnt are also recorded and divided into the forestry tenure and other areas burnt. For the forestry area, forest type and dominant species are noted onthe Wild Fire Data Form. The codes and descriptions used arein Table 2. 22
Table 2: Queensland DPI Forestry, fire incident report vegetation codes and descriptions Forest type Species code Description NFBP Bunya pine – native forest NPBP Bunya pine – native plantation NFHP Hoop pine – native forest NPHP Hoop pine – native plantation NFWSC Wet sclerophyll – native forest NFDSC Dry sclerophyll – native forest NFCP Cypress pine – native forest NFRFT Rainforest – native forest NFWLM Wallum – native forest NFOTH Other – native forest NPOTH Other – native plantation XPOTH Other – exotic plantation NPPHD Hardwood – native plantation XPPCB Caribbean pine (var. Bahamensis) – exotic plantation XPPCC Caribbean pine (var. caribaea) – exotic plantation XPPCH Caribbean pine (var. Hondurensis) – exotic plantation XPPEE Slash pine – exotic plantation XPPTP Patula pine – exotic plantation XPRDP Monterey pine – exotic plantation XPLGP Loblolly pine – exotic plantation Fires are classified as: 1. very minor, where suppression cost is below $2000 and less than 20m3 is burnt 2. minor, where suppression cost is between $2000 and $20000, and the resource loss is less than 250m3 or less than 0.2ha of plantation 3. moderate, where suppression cost is between $20000 and $75000 4. major, where suppression cost is greater than $75000 and resource loss is greater than 250m3. Subsequent reporting depends onthe class of fire. For very minor and minor fires, the wildfire data form and attached maps are submitted tothe district manager for district records. For moderate fires the data forms, maps and reports with recommendations are submitted to regional managers for regional level records. Data, maps and reports on major fires are submitted to head office. Itis not always practical to complete all fields onthe report forms, especially for flame heights and rates of spread. A system (‘Wildfire Database’) for reporting regional fire summary statistics toa centralised register isin place. 232.7.3 Queensland Fire and Rescue Service Queensland’s Fire and Rescue Service (FRS) is responsible for fire prevention and suppression for freehold, leasehold, and crown land not managed bythe other agencies. For many areas, it exercises this responsibility through the fire permit system and negotiation and cooperation with rural stakeholders. The service issues permits to conduct prescribed burns throughout 85% of Queensland and coordinates approximately 1600 volunteer rural brigades. The permits are issued by 2500 volunteer fire wardens who are responsible for specific areas. FRS has a fire incident reporting and data gathering process for fire events. This isa scaled down version ofthe AIRS. The data gathered isnot as comprehensive and, as with the other rural fire services, data collection and completion of forms isthe responsibility of individual brigades. Planned and unplanned fires that a brigade attends are reported. The information reported and submitted tothe central AIRS database varies depending onthe brigade. There isno checking on information that maybe collected atthe brigade level and not reported. Fire severity or intensity and fire weather attributes are not usually reported. The most consistently and commonly reported fields are location, type of fire (eg grass or scrub), area burned and date. The area burnt maybe approximate and not based on mapped boundaries. There isno reporting system for the widespread prescribed burning practiced by leaseholders and private landholders or unplanned fires that maybe suppressed by leaseholders and private landholders. FRS does, however, receive satellite data collected bythe Department of Natural Resources which it uses to alert individual brigades and uses for some specific GIS and/or fire history mapping projects. These donot enable assessment of vegetation impacts. 2.8 Northern Territory 2.8.1 Northern Territory Parks and Wildlife Commission The Northern Territory Parks and Wildlife Commission (PWC), the lead agency for fire data collection inthe Northern Territory, incorporates the Tropical Savanna Cooperative Research Centre and the Northern Territory Bushfire Council. The Northern Territory Fire Service is responsible for the greater Darwin metropolitan area. The rural fire brigades donot collect fire data. PWC has limited resources and very large areas to manage and therefore relies primarily on NOAA data from DOLA, Western Australian for fire monitoring, research and management decision making and fire scar mapping. This information is based onthe ‘best pass’ every nine days and monthly summaries, so that small and large fires maybe missed ornot reported. To minimise that andto provide more detailed and higher resolution data for specific projects and programmes, the PWC also obtains data from the ACRES Quicklook web site which displays available images from Landsat 7. PWC also purchases Landsat 7 high resolution images every three to four months for fire scar mapping. 24
Landsat 7 satellite high resolution images have a much higher level of resolution than NOAA satellite images. The former canbe used to detect fire scars and fires less than 100 metres in size under good or better conditions. However, Landsat 7 passes over the Northern Territory every 16 days rather than daily for the NOAA satellite. Landsat 7 also has problems capturing data inthe cloudy conditions that are typical for particular regions within the northern Australia, such as much ofthe Cape York area. The satellite remote sensed data collected and collated bythe PWC into one month fire map summaries is distributed to national park managers inthe Northern Territory for local fire monitoring, particular research projects and/or management decision making. These fire maps canbe at various scales depending onthe satellite from which the data is obtained. Another source of data relevant tothe agreed indicators isthe FirePlot long-term monitoring programme that canbe used to model forest and woodland community responses to past, current and/or changed fire regimes. This programme, initially confined to Kakadu National Park, has been extended tothe Litchfield, Nitmiluk and Gregory National Parks. It consists of131 plots in Kakadu NP, 41 plots in Litchfield NP, 47in Nitmiluk NPand 50 plots in Gregory NP. These are surveyed every five years for fauna and flora attributes as well asfor soils, geology, slope and aspect, and fire history information. Plots are40 mx20 min size and cover 37 land system classes. Data from this long-term monitoring programme will be used to model ecosystem responses to varying fire regimes within national parks. It will be assessed against a range of spatial datasets, such as those from Landsat and NOAA fire scar mapping to indicate future biological trends as well as that from aerial transects in which the status of vegetation is recorded at specific locations. At each location, the vegetation is recorded as unburnt, fully burnt within a radius of100 m, or partially burnt (< 20% burnt within 100m). The Northern Territory is well placed to provide information on fire impacts on vegetation with regard to fire histories ifthe fire scar mapping is maintained. From the fire plot dataset and location transects, the PWC will also be able to give an indication ofthe ecological tolerances ofthe communities captured bythe fire plots. However, currently only data from the mid 1990s is available. Unlike the southern states, burning is widespread and tens thousands of hectares are burned over a period of weeks. Small isolated fires and closed canopy communities are only a small proportion ofthe total area burnt. 252.9 Australian Capital Territory 2.9.1A.C.T. Emergency Services Authority TheA.C.T. Emergency Services Authority (ESA), through A.C.T. Bush Fire and Emergency Services, is responsible for the Strategic Bushfire Management Plan for the Australian Capital Territory. The plan includes a programme of fuel reduction burning and organisation or suppression activities. ESAis required to ‘monitor the scope and effectiveness ofthe Strategic Bushfire Management Plan’. This requires an audit or review of process, outputs and outcomes defined bythe plan and monitoring ofthe plan itself. The plan does not explain how that monitoring isto be undertaken orthe nature ofthe data that would be collected to support that monitoring. 2.9.2A.C.T. Rural Fire Service The ACT Rural Fire Service (RFS) is responsible for fire prevention and suppression in rural areas ofthe Australian Capital Territory. RFS has 11 brigades including Parks Rural Fire Brigade, which is manned bythe ACT Parks and Conservation Service andis responsible for fire prevention and suppression for nature conservation reserves, and Forests Rural Fire Brigade, which is manned byACT Forests andis responsible for fire prevention and suppression for pine plantations. The RFS records information on fires attended byRFS brigades. The information includes locality, approximate extent and, where submitted bythe brigade, whether the vegetation burned was grass, native forest or pine plantation. With the exception of major fires such asin January 2003, the fires are not mapped. 3. Discussion and conclusions 3.1 Importance of fire monitoring and reporting Many Australian native plant and indirectly, animal species, rely on particular fire regimes. That is, the periodicity, season and intensity of fire events, to maintain their relative positions of dominance or abundance within forest and vegetation communities. Across the continent fire regimes vary considerably in response tobio-climatic variables andin many instances have changed, with resultant changes in structure and floristics. Atthe continental scale the impact of changes to fire regimes onthe health and vitality of Australian forest and vegetation is often poorly understood. Although in-depth and long-term studies have been undertaken and have identified potential impacts from changes to fire regimes atthe stratal and dominant species levels, these are few in number. These studies are also not comprehensive in terms of identifying the responses ofall ofthe dominant species that may determine the classification of forest and vegetation communities. Given this complexity, meaningful monitoring and reporting to meet policy requirements atthe national level against the agreed indicators requires data not only asto the area burnt and the intensity of burning, but also requires the data tobe in spatial context so that frequency of fire events orthe interval between them canbe determined. 26
Without such information meaningful assessment of whether ornot current fire regimes, planned and unplanned, are within the range of historical variation and the ecological tolerance of forest communities atthe landscape level cannot be undertaken. 3.2 Monitoring and reporting systems Primary responsibility in Australia for monitoring and reporting of fire statistics lies with theof State and Territory government agencies. Currently there are20 agencies around Australia responsible for fire management. These often have quite distinct and different management objectives depending onthe land tobe managed and the availability of resources. This affects the nature ofthe data that is collected in terms of quality and attributes measured. Generally, those agencies that have a fire management responsibility on private land are primarily focused on fire prevention for protection of life and property. Consequently the data recorded is focused on equipment used, area burnt and property damage. In many cases attributes such asthe vegetation type burnt and severity ofthe fire are seldom recorded, andin most instances there is little accurate spatial data available for fire history mapping to determine past and current fire regimes. The detail at which data is recorded and the accuracy and reliability of area burnt estimates on private tenure are also highly variable, although allof the main private tenure agencies use similar reporting systems. In contrast, agencies responsible for public land often have widely disparate, multiple objectives to manage. Asa result, more detailed and extensive information with regard tothe agreed indicators is often recorded. There are however, considerable differences inhow the data is stored and collated. Although several ofthe public tenure land management agencies involved in fire management have detailed ongoing vegetation data collection and fire history mapping programmes in place, for others the data within fire incident reporting records have not been collated toa sufficient degree for Montreal Process reporting. There are also major differences between agencies in what is recorded. This is particularly so with regard to vegetation typing and severity of fire events. Consequently, with the exception of forested areas on public tenure in Tasmania and southern Western Australia, there is little orno information comprehensively collected on fire intensity or damage to native vegetation, even though fire history mapping programmes maybe in place. Importantly, most fire history mapping that has been undertaken isnot up-to-date and/or only covers a period ofa few years or specific target areas. For all agencies the vegetation type burnt by both planned and unplanned fires isnot recorded within fire incident reports atthe level of detail required for assessing impacts on forest and vegetation health/condition and vitality. Information on vegetation extent and type atthe appropriate level can, however, be obtained from other datasets, for example, State and Territory NVIS datasets. Although all fire management agencies can provide an estimate ofthe area of forest and vegetation burnt for particular years or periods, onthe basis of current reporting methodologies and existing spatial datasets, meaningful reporting can only be achieved atthe subregional level for specific areas and tenures. These include national parks and state forests in south west Western Australia and Tasmania, and public land in South Australia and Victoria and national parks. InNew South Wales significant effort would 27be required to collate fire datasets and conduct spatial comparisons with vegetation cover. There is also potentially enough collated information to carry out similar work inthe southern brigalow and south east Queensland bioregions although fire history mapping isnot upto date. For all of these areas, other than south west Western Australia and Tasmanian public land, identification of historical fire regimes and classification of recent fire events into intensity classes would require the development of models based on fire danger ratings or recorded fire weather and assumed fuel loads. Larger scale and accurate fire data is also available for most of Western Australia and the Northern Territory asa result of satellite fire monitoring and fire scar mapping programmes. This does not, however, capture data on small low intensity fire events that can make upa major component ofthe total area burnt inany one season and only covers the last few years. Currently, no State or Territory agency can report immediately to provide anup-to-date, comprehensive and meaningful analysis of fire impacts on vegetation. This is primarily dueto meaningful reporting requiring comparisons of current fire regimes, including classification of fires by intensity within major forest and vegetation types, tothe historical range of variation and identified ecological tolerance ofthe community. The ecological tolerances ofthe vegetation communities is often not known inany detail, there is little intensity or damage data collected and identification ofthe historical range of variation is minimal atthe national levels. Several ofthe public land management agencies do have sufficient data and understanding ofthe fire ecology of many ofthe major forest and vegetation communities to conduct the analyses required to report for the majority of their forests and vegetation inthe near future. These agencies are CALM in Western Australia for the southern forests, The Tasmanian Parks and Wildlife Service and Forestry Tasmania. With commitment of resources, other agencies can conduct programmes of data collation, digitising and analysis that will allow for meaningful reporting inthe near future, although this will require the development of models to classify past fires by intensity or severity. These agencies are the South Australian National Parks and Wildlife Service, ForestrySA, the Victorian Department of Natural Resources and Environment, State Forests NSW, the NSW Parks and Wildlife Service and the Queensland Parks and Wildlife Service. The resources needed to collate existing data and digitise itfor the required spatial analysis will, however, vary and time frames for such work vary from months to years depending onthe agency. Given that each ofthe major fire management agencies inall states and territories will require the dedication of specific project teams to carry out the work, expenditure to achieve the goal of providing up-to-date and meaningful data for reporting against the agreed indicators would nationally bein excess of several million dollars over a minimum period oftwo years. Development of modelled ecological tolerances for numerous major forest and vegetation communities will also be required if meaningful sustainability assessments areto be made. The latter canbe achieved onthe basis ofthe extensive body of research that has already been undertaken for many ofthe forest and vegetation types, but would also require extensive funding support. 28For private tenures the amount of work tobe undertaken required in terms of collation, and digitising isfar greater, and estimates are likely tobe indicative only rather than accurate representations of past fire extent and vegetation burnt. For northern western Australia, the Northern Territory and Queensland, there is sufficient satellite data collection and fire history mapping to report large-scale fires on both private and public tenures over the last couple of years. The issue for the agencies responsible for fire reporting in Queensland and the Northern Territory isthe remoteness of many ofthe fires, the limited resources available and the consequent reliance on satellite data collection with minimal API and/or ground verification or follow up fire incident report data collection. Although new and combined satellite data collection methodologies are being tried, the inability to include most small, low intensity fires under cloud or closed canopies into area estimates orfor fire history mapping and determination of current fire regimes, is likely to continue. This isdue tothe major resource commitments required and the ability ofthe agencies to satisfy these independently. Onthe basis of current datasets andin the absence of programmes to update, collate and develop models for fire intensity or severity, meaningful reporting can only be achieved for forests on Tasmanian and Western Australia public land. This is despite the fact that all agencies can provide an estimate ofthe area burnt each year for the last few years. The inherent accuracy problems in some ofthe data capture methods and inconsistencies in reporting between agencies, such estimates will vary widely in reliability. For estimation of area burnt, incorporation of current figures for private tenure into total state and national estimates would out-weigh the reliability of estimates from State and Territory agencies that do collect data ina consistent and accurate wayas a result ofthe extent of private and leasehold forests. Therefore, meaningful reporting can only be achieved at either subregional levels inthe near future and/orfor specific land tenures in specific States. 3.3 Options to ensure national monitoring and reporting in future A number of cost-effective options are currently available to implement a national coordinated and standardised approach for gathering appropriate fire incidence data, including fire footprint mapping, which would allow for meaningful assessments ofthe impacts of current fire regimes against the agreed indicators. The most practical of these would be based upon expansion of trial satellite-data gathering programmes to either cover the whole continent or cover those areas for which there is insufficient information and ongoing programmes of data collection. There are advantages and disadvantages with these methodologies, in heavily forested areas, todo with resolution and the ability of thermal sensors to collect information with regard to cool, small fires typical of prescribed burns under canopies and/or dense cloud cover. Recent technological advances and combined tiered, remote sensing approaches to data collection have the potential to overcome these problems. For example, the newer MODIS satellite thermal remote sensors can potentially be used to identify hot spots more accurately and reliably than the NOAA satellite thermal sensors, given that it uses different and wider bands. This can then be combined with data collected from the Landsat 7 satellite to provide higher resolution spatial data in areas of special interest. 29By utilising different satellites, special areas of interest canbe identified – such as those areas where a high degree of burning is occurring or where little information is being provided by satellites ona regular basis because of dense cloud or canopy cover. In these areas, targeted APIor Lidar data collection canbe used to provide highly detailed and accurate data asto fire boundaries, damage indices and community responses. However, any combination of methods must be undertaken in conjunction with the collation and digitising of existing datasets to provide comprehensive fire history mapping for current reporting needs andas benchmarks for future reporting. This information can then compared with standardised and detailed vegetation typing, such as NVIS, and modelled historical fire regimes for extant forest and vegetation communities to provide sustainability assessments of current fire regimes atthe national and regional levels. There is sufficient empirical data and understanding ofthe ecology of many dominant tree species to begin developing modelled historical fire regimes andto identify the ecological tolerance of forest and vegetation communities to fire disturbance atthe NVIS level 5/6. This approach would provide accurate and verifiable reporting for the agreed indicators, allow assessment ofthe ecological sustainability of current wild fire regimes and prescribed burning practices atthe national level, and provide a practical means of ongoing monitoring. It would also provide essential data ata national level that canbe used for development of fire related carbon release models and would also beof value to greenhouse gas inventory and abatement programmes. 30
Abbreviations and glossary AIRS Australian Incident Reporting System API Air photo interpretation - The examination of photographic images for the purpose of identifying objects and patterns and judging their significance. API may involve mapping the features of interest from a single photo or from two photos (known asa stereo pair), in which case the interpreter has the benefit of seeing the features in three dimensions. APIis both anart anda science, andin general the more experienced the interpreter the better the result. ArcInfo A comprehensive GIS software package with advanced geoprocessing and data conversion capabilities produced bythe Environmental Systems Research Institute, Inc. ArcPad A desktop GIS software package produced bythe Environmental Systems Research Institute, Inc. ArcView A desktop GIS software package produced bythe Environmental Systems Research Institute, Inc. ERMS Environmental Resource Management System - a desktop GIS software package produced bythe NSW National Parks and Wildlife Service inthe mid 1990s. FirePlot A long-term fire monitoring programme that canbe used to model forest and woodland community responses to past, current and/or changed fire regimes. FIRES Fire Incident Reporting and Evaluation System FIRS Fire and Incident Reporting System GIS Geographic Information System GPS Global Positioning System IFIS Integrated Fires Information System Lidar A radar system that operates using visible, near infra-redor ultra-violet light. An acronym for “light detection and ranging. Lidar systems can measure surface material properties as well as deriving accurate DEMs. Map Master A desktop software package for mapping boundaries, points and linear features. 31
Mapinfo A desktop GIS software package produced bythe MapInfo Corporation, Inc. MODIS Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer. NOAA National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration NVIS National Vegetation Information System ParkInfo ParkInfo an information system that is based on ArcView developed and used bythe Queensland parks and Wildlife service. ParkInfo enables entry ofthe data for each planned and unplanned fire into a spatial database. 32
References AFAC (Australasian Fire Authorities Council) (2002). Annual Report 2002. http://www.afac.com.au/docs/about/afac_anrep_0102.pdf Attiwill, P.M. (1994). Disturbance of forest ecosystems: the scientific basis for conservation utilisation. In: The Burning Continent: Forest Ecosystems and Fire Management in Australia, Attiwill, P.M., Florence, R., Hurditch, W.E. and Hurditch, W.J. (eds), Institute of Public Affairs. Australian Greenhouse Office (2001). Greenhouse gas emissions from land use change in Australia: An integrated application ofthe National Carbon Accounting System. Environment Australia, Canberra. Benson, J.S. and Redpath, P.A. (1997). The nature ofpre-European native vegetation in south-eastern Australia: a critique of Ryan, D.G., Ryan, J.R. and Starr, B.J. (1995), The Australian Landscape – observations ofthe Explorers and Early Settlers. Cunninghamia 5(2): 285–328. Bradstock, R.A, Williams, J.E, Gill, A.M. (eds) (2002). Flammable Australia: The Fire Regimes and Biodiversity ofa Continent, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. ESCAVI (Executive Steering Committee for Australian Vegetation Information) (2003). Australian Vegetation Attribute Manual, version 6.0, Department of Environment and Heritage, Canberra. Florence, R.G. (1994). The ecological basis of forest fire management inNew South Wales. In: The Burning Continent: Forest Ecosystems and Fire Management in Australia, Attiwill, P.M., Florence, R., Hurditch, W.E. and Hurditch, W.J. (eds), Institute of Public Affairs. Gifford, R.M. and Howden, M. (2001). Vegetation thickening inan ecological perspective: significance to national greenhouse gas inventories. Environmental Science and Policy 4:59–72. Gill, A.M. (1981). Adaptive responses of Australian vascular species to fires in Gill, AM, Groves, RH & Noble, RI (eds), Fire and the Australian biota, Australian Academy of Science, Canberra, pp. 243-272. Gill, A.M., Moore, P.H.R., McCarthy, M.A. and Land, S. (1997). Contemporary Fire Regimes inthe Forests of South Western Australia. Centre for Plant Biodiversity. CSIRO. Gill, A.M., Woinarski, J.C.Z., York, A. (1999). Australia's Biodiversity - Responses to Fire Plants, Birds and Invertebrates. Biodiversity Technical Paper, No. 1. Department of Environment and Heritage, Canberra. http://www.deh.gov.au/biodiversity/publications/technical/fire/prescribed-8.html 33
Harrington, G.N. and Sanderson, K.D. (1994). Recent Contraction ofWet Sclerophyll Forest in Northern Australia Dueto Invasion by Rainforest. CSIRO Division of Wildlife and Ecology. Harrington, G.N. (1995). Should we play God with the rainforest? Wildlife Australia Winter 1995:8–11. House of Representatives Select Committee (2003). A Nation Charred. Report onthe inquiry into bushfires, The Parliament ofthe Commonwealth of Australia, Canberra, p.467. Jurskis, V., Bridges, B., deMar, P. (2003). Fire management in Australia: the lessons of200 years. In: Proceedings ofthe Joint Australian and New Zealand Institutes of Forestry Conference, Queenstown, New Zealand, 27 April to1 May 2003, Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, Wellington, New Zealand, 303–368. Jurskis, V. (2004). The role of changed fire regimes inthe apparent decline of eucalypts in temperate Australia. In: 17th Annual Australasian Fire Authorities Councils Conference, Perth, Western Australia. Jurskis, V. (2004). Eucalypt decline in Australia anda general concept of tree decline and die-back. Forest Ecology and Management 215:1–20. MIG (1997). Australia’s First Approximation Report for the Montreal Process. Montreal Implementation Group, Commonwealth of Australia. Munro, C. Frakes, Iand Thackway, R. (2005). What burns when? Distribution ofnon- forest bushfires across Australia. Bureau of Rural Sciences, Canberra. NFI (National Forest Inventory) (1998). Australia’s State ofthe Forest Report 1998, Bureau of Rural Sciences, Canberra. NLWRA (National Land and Water Resources Audit) (2001). Australian Native Vegetation Assessment, 2001, Canberra. Rolls, E.C. (1999). Land ofthe grass: the loss of Australia’s grasslands. Australian Geographical Studies. 37(3):197–213. SCEC (Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation) (1984). Bushfires and the Australian Environment, Report bythe House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation, Australian Government Printing Service, Canberra. Standards Australia (1989). AS 2482-1989 Geographic information systems – Geographic data - Interchange of feature-coded digital mapping data, 3rdEd. Standards Association of Australia, Homebush, NSW. www.saiglobal.com/shop Walker, D. and Singh, G. (1981). Vegetation history. In: Australian Vegetation, Groves, R.H. (ed), Cambridge University Press. 3435 White, T.C.R. and Jurskis, V. (2004). Fundamental causes of eucalypt forest decline and possible management solutions. Proceedings ofa colloquium, Batemans Bay, New South Wales, November 2003.
Appendix 1: National Forest Inventory forest classes and areas (hectares) by State Forest type ACT NSW NTQld SATas VicWA 1. Acacia low woodland forest 2,001,3702,891,2341,078,63637,5003,985,4932. Acacia medium woodland forest 129,0321,308,342 276,68850,7343. Acacia tall woodland forest 242,5934. Acacia low open forest 525,494 275,023 470,966 200 1005. Acacia medium open forest 12,403 856,9052,409,8437 22,02625,5006. Acacia tall open forest 7. Banksia low woodland forest 90,714 158 8. Callitris low woodland forest 6,403 109,181 789 7,1009. Callitris medium woodland forest 46169,844 137,99835,60010. Callitris tall woodland forest 11. Callitris low open forest 1,27012. Callitris medium open forest 24261,199 310,3337,60013. Callitris tall open forest 16,00014. Casuarina low woodland forest 1,8631,3873,80024,40015. Casuarina medium woodland forest 182,28925 16. Casuarina tall woodland forest 17317. Casuarina low open forest 7188 726,23418. Casuarina medium open forest 30845,678 137,52019. Casuarina tall open forest 20. Eucalypt mallee low woodland forest 9,2114,430,2581,040,3003,918,30521. Eucalypt mallee medium woodland forest 126,923 410,4424,20022. Eucalypt mallee tall woodland forest 23. Eucalypt mallee low open forest 8,0581,268,0681,055,08624. Eucalypt mallee medium open forest 3,085,131 974 36
Forest type ACT NSW NTQld SATas VicWA 25. Eucalypt mallee tall open forest 26. Eucalypt low woodland forest 3,171 114,0096,715,4901,676,2531,206,07761,934 209,4003,431,07227. Eucalypt medium woodland forest 18,30410,266,95516,432,30725,528,832 582,0631,258,672 721,20019,038,17628. Eucalypt tall woodland forest 91,4741,012,2392,75,185 114,30029. Eucalypt low open forest 4,90572,0398,286 112,362 225,10030. Eucalypt medium open forest 65,4378,021,3445,684,5133,260,79843,1796,8902,761,6001,776,91331. Eucalypt tall open forest 28,7873,854,83860,787 909 840,0142,281,900 170,92132. Leptospermum low open forest 8218,8279,10033. Leptospermum medium open forest 34. Leptospermum tall open forest 35. Mangroves low open forest/woodland 31436. Mangroves medium open forest 37. Mangroves low closed forest 38. Mangroves medium closed forest 3,121 445,489 153,50219,7112,600 172,88039. Melaleuca low woodland forest 977,5011,805,485 825 80,600 155,05640. Melaleuca medium woodland forest 301,66834,13041. Melaleuca tall woodland forest 4,54942. Melaleuca low open forest 75612,494 181 5799,40043. Melaleuca medium open forest 44,411 427,607 236,97944. Melaleuca tall open forest 45. Mixed species low woodland forest 606,92116.60646. Mixed species medium woodland forest 55,177 389,947 891 47. Mixed species tall woodland forest 3348. Mixed species low open forest 91,634 902 49. Mixed species medium open forest 280,02950. Mixed species tall open forest 163,01437
Forest ty38 peACT NSWNT QldSA Tas Vic WA51. Other low woodland forest 4,4352,600 397,56152. Other medium woodland forest 10,380 400 650,78353. Other tall woodland forest 54. Other low open forest 20,238 286 119,00055. Other medium open forest 316,446 800 56. Other tall open forest 16,03857. Rainforest low closed forest 308,635 539 58. Rainforest medium closed forest 467,236 317,8351,084,782 406,74815,9006,79859. Rainforest tall closed forest 1,532,888 190,01860. Plantation hardwood 3344,451 527 84,97910,600 152,80061. Plantation softwood 19,536 246,9344,29851,42470,994 234,60094,50062. Plantation unknown 63. Non-forest 94,856 347,30599,514,81234,232,29671,009,8963,499,28614,724,600 217,503,15564. No data — spatial 5,981,744 419,4231,608,55819,75655,900No data 4,07846,797,68492,259,98914,940,89218,600 Total forest 121,49726,741,88234,879,43146,227,71510,788,7043,134,7877,715,70034,799,545 Total area of State or Territory 235,92233,362,316 134,817,963 172,720,00098,400,0006,808,00022,760,00252,550,000 Source: NFI (2001)
Appendix 2: Queensland Parks and Wildlife fire history datasets Control burn history database of southern brigalow bioregion (SSB) forest reservations – FER — Department of Natural Resources and Mines The control burn database represents boundaries of control burns in native forest reservations ofthe Southern Brigalow Bioregion under the administration ofthe Department of Primary Industries – Forestry (DPIF). The control burn boundaries recorded by DPIF show where the control burn was attempted; not all of this area may have been successfully burnt. An estimate ofthe percentage burnt is included inthe attributes asare start dates, spread rate, cost and drought index. The database consists ofone ArcView shapefile or several Arcinfo coverages for each year ofthe fire. Boundaries are primarily from DPIF paper maps for data collected from 1982 to 1998 with additional management unit identification (MUID) boundaries from the Queensland Forestry MUID digital database overlaid. ArcInfo coverages were used from 1992 for some parts ofthe fire boundaries. The source data was mapped at various scales, but most commonly at1:25000 and1:50000. Positioning ofthe fires was initially done manually over a light table using transparent satellite imagery plots with overlaid MUID boundaries. Data was then entered into ArcInfo. Another capture method was later developed which was applied inthe majority ofthe data capture process. Scanned images ofthe fire maps were rectified tothe Queensland DPIF MUID digital database using Arcinfo. The data were then digitised on screen with the rectified image displayed behind the fire coverage. Attributes are from DPIF records of fire information. Wildfire history database of southern brigalow bioregion forest reservations — Department of Natural Resources and Mines The Wildfire database represents boundaries of unplanned fires in forest reservations ofthe southern brigalow bioregion managed by DPIF. It consists of polygons and attributes. Attributes include start dates, area burnt, cause, cost and various environmental measurements. The period covered is from December 1964 to February 1998. Fire boundaries are sourced from DPIF wildfire paper maps. The source data was mapped at various scales from 1:24000 to1:100 000, but most commonly at1:25000 and1:50000 scales. The scale of source wildfire maps are identified within the polygons. Data are entered from maps inthe same wayas described above. Coverage for each year was entered separately and later merged in ArcView to produce shape files ofall fires. All available paper maps have been captured. Itwas found atthe time of data collection that paper records of unplanned fires prior to 1981 no longer existed for most reservations ofthe southern brigalow bioregion. Burnt areas less than 10ha in total area were not intentionally captured, although some may have been digitised coincidentally. Preliminary checking with field-site data indicated that a large proportion of unplanned fires were not being recorded inthe wildfire database. 39
Thus the database does not give a complete picture of wildfire histories ofthe forestry reservations. This maybe largely dueto the remoteness ofthe Southern Brigalow Bioregion forestry reserves, as unplanned fires occur without being recorded or observed. The checking undertaken at this time is only preliminary; further verification was planned. Forest fire history of south east Queensland — Department of Natural Resources and Mines This dataset consists of controlled or prescribed burning and wildfire histories delineated as spatial ArcInfo polygon coverages. These were generated from forestry district office records such as reproductions of paper wildfire and prescribed burn forestry maps with line work digitised from existing geo-rectified overlays of tenure boundaries, roads, rivers and other features. The positional accuracy of these fire history coverages varies, because it depends on data that varies in scale and quality. An accuracy rating has been allocated to each fire where possible, although this too depends onthe quality ofthe data the line work may have captured from roads and rivers and other features. Most fire records are for state forest areas, although some records have been captured for private land and national estates. Draft fire history of QPWS protected areas in South East Management Region. (EPA - QNPWS) An ongoing programme tomap the fire histories of prescribed burning and wildfires in QNPWS national parks, conservation parks and other protected areas in south east Queensland isin place. Data from January 1961 was integrated into an ArcInfo database. Data was obtained from QNPWS fire reports for fires since 1984 and from clear overlays onto which fires have been drawn each year, and where these are insufficient, through internal departmental memoranda and local knowledge. Data for fires prior to 1984 are from reports of fire threatening national park reservations. Typically the boundaries of each fire are marked on clear overlays by local staff after each fire using their knowledge ofthe fire. Relevant topographic maps and aerial photographs may also be used and boundaries may driven and GPS recordings undertaken to verify the fire boundary. This isnot, however, universal and depends upon the circumstances atthe time and within the district. The data was then digitised using ArcInfo software. Lumholtz National Park database This consists ofa GIS mapping database containing a vegetation mapas per NVIS and fire history coverages from 1994 to 1997. Data was from departmental vegetation surveys and fire reports. These were digitised onto Environmental Resource Management System (ERMS) and transferred to vector ArcInfo format. 40
Magnetic Island National Park Database This consists ofa GIS mapping database containing a vegetation mapas per NVIS and fire history coverages from 1970 to 1996. Data was from departmental vegetation surveys and fire reports. These were digitised onto ERMS and transferred to vector ArcInfo format. Hinchinbrook Island National Park GIS This ArcInfo GIS consists of data on vegetation communities asper the NVIS, road and park infrastructure, topography, creeks, fire history and tenure boundaries. The data date from 1991. Mt Elliot (Bowling Green Bay National Park) database This consists ofa GIS mapping database containing a vegetation mapas per NVIS and fire history coverages from 1985 to 1997. Data was from departmental vegetation surveys and fire reports. These were digitised onto ERMS and transferred to vector ArcInfo format. Cape Cleveland (Bowling Green Bay National Park) database This consists ofa GIS mapping database containing a vegetation mapas per NVIS and fire history coverages from 1985 to 1996. Data was from departmental vegetation surveys and fire reports. These were digitised onto ERMS and transferred to vector ArcInfo format. Paluma Range National Park database This consists ofa GIS mapping database containing a vegetation mapas per NVIS and fire history coverages from 1988 to 1996. Data was from departmental vegetation surveys and fire reports. These were digitised onto ERMS and transferred to vector ArcInfo format. White Mountains National Park database This consists ofa GIS mapping database containing a vegetation mapas per the NVIS and fire history coverages from 1990 to 1997. Data was from departmental vegetation surveys and fire reports. These were digitised onto ERMS and transferred to vector ArcInfo format. Edmund Kennedy National Park database This consists ofa GIS mapping database containing a vegetation mapas per the NVIS and fire history coverages from 1988 to 1996. Data was from departmental vegetation surveys and fire reports. These were digitised onto ERMS and transferred to ArcInfo. 41
